<?xml version="1.0" encoding="iso-8859-1" ?>
<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd">
<TEI.2 lang="en">
    <teiHeader>
        <fileDesc>
            <titleStmt>
                <title>It's like this, cat</title>
                <author>Emily Neville</author>
              <respStmt>
                <resp>Illustrated by</resp>
                <name>Emil Weiss</name>
              </respStmt>
            </titleStmt>
            <publicationStmt>
                <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
                <date>March 27, 2008</date>
                <idno type='etext-no'>24921</idno>
                <availability>
                  <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere
                  at no cost and with almost no restrictions whatsoever.
                  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under
                  the terms of the Project Gutenberg License online at
                  www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
                </availability>
            </publicationStmt>
            <sourceDesc>
               <bibl>
                 <title>It's like this, cat</title>
                 <author>Emily Neville</author>
                 <imprint>
                   <publisher>Harper &amp; Row, Publishers, Inc.</publisher>
                   <pubPlace>New York, New York</pubPlace>
                   <date>1963</date>
                 </imprint>
               </bibl>
            </sourceDesc>
        </fileDesc>
        <encodingDesc>
          <classDecl>
            <taxonomy id="lc">
              <bibl>
                <title>Library of Congress Classification</title>
              </bibl>
            </taxonomy>
          </classDecl>
        </encodingDesc>
        <profileDesc>
          <langUsage>
            <language id="en" />
          </langUsage>
        </profileDesc>
        <revisionDesc>
          <change>
            <date value="200X-XX">March 27, 2008</date>
            <respStmt>
                <resp>Produced by <name>Adam Buchbinder</name>, <name>Ren&eacute; Anderson Benitz</name>,
                and the <name>Online Distributed Proofreading Team</name> at
                &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/c&gt;.
                Page-images available at
                &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/projects/projectID467059110c292/&gt;</resp>
            </respStmt>
            <item>Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1</item>
          </change>
        </revisionDesc>
    </teiHeader>

    <pgExtensions>
      <pgStyleSheet>
        figure       { text-align: center }
        .large       { font-size: large }
        .bold        { font-weight: bold }
        .italic      { font-style: italic }
        .antiqua     { font-weight: bold }
        .smallcaps   { font-variant: small-caps }
        .small       { font-size: small }
        .title       { font-size: 200%; font-weight: bold }
        .right       { text-align: right }
      </pgStyleSheet>
    </pgExtensions>

<text lang="en">
  <front>
    <div>
      <divGen type="pgheader" />
    </div>
    <div>
      <divGen type="encodingDesc" />
    </div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always">

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then>
    <p><lb/></p>
    <p rend="text-align: center">It's like this, cat<lb/><lb/>
       by Emily Neville<lb/>ILLUSTRATED BY EMIL WEISS</p>
    <p><lb/></p>
  </then>
</pgIf>

<p>
<figure rend="width: 100%" url="images/cover.jpg">
  <figDesc>Cover: Dave standing on top step looking across street;<lb/>
           Cat curled up below. Tall apartment building in background.</figDesc>
</figure>
</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always">

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then>
    <p><lb/></p>
    <p rend="text-align: center">IT'S LIKE THIS, CAT<lb/><lb/>
       BY EMILY NEVILLE<lb/>PICTURES BY EMIL WEISS</p>
    <p><lb/></p>
  </then>
</pgIf>

<p>
<figure rend="width: 100%" url="images/title.png">
  <figDesc>Title Page: City scene of park entrance and busy street:<lb/>
           tall apartment building on left; car driving by;<lb/>
           bike-riding boy behind running boy and dog;<lb/>
           mailman handing mail to woman on sidewalk.</figDesc>
</figure>
</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always; small">
<l rend='smallcaps'>it&rsquo;s like this, cat</l>
<l>Copyright &copy; 1963 by Emily Neville</l>
</div>

<div rend="small">
<p>Printed in the United States of America. All rights reserved. No part of
this book may be used or reproduced in any manner whatsoever without
written permission except in the case of brief quotations embodied in
critical articles and reviews. For information address Harper &amp; Row,
Publishers, Incorporated, 49 East 33rd Street, New York 16, N.Y.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<l rend="font-size: large">TO</l>
<l rend="font-size: large">MIDNIGHT,</l>
<l rend="font-size: large">&ldquo;MAYOR&rdquo; OF GRAMERCY PARK</l>
<l rend="font-size: large">1954-1962</l>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<head>CONTENTS</head>
<divGen type="toc" />

<!--
<pb n="viii"/><anchor id="Pgviii"/>
-->

</div>
</front>

<body>
<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<p rend="title; text-align: center">IT&rsquo;S LIKE THIS, CAT</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<!--<pb n="001"/>--><anchor id="Pg001"/>
  <index index="toc" level1="&nbsp;1. Cat and Kate" />
  <index index="pdf"/>
  <head rend='right'>1</head>
<figure rend="width: 100%" url="images/image01.png">
  <figDesc>Illustration: Dave holding Cat while Dad looks up<lb/>
 from reading his newspaper.</figDesc>
</figure>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then>
    <p><lb/></p>
    <p rend='right'>CAT AND KATE</p>
    <p><lb/></p>
  </then>
</pgIf>

<p>My father is always talking about how a dog can
be very educational for a boy. This is one reason
I got a cat.</p>

<p>My father talks a lot anyway. Maybe being a
lawyer he gets in the habit. Also, he&rsquo;s a small
guy with very little gray curly hair, so maybe he
thinks he&rsquo;s got to roar a lot to make up for not
being a big hairy tough guy. Mom is thin and
quiet, and when anything upsets her, she gets
<!--<pb n="002"/>--><anchor id="Pg002"/>
asthma. In the apartment&mdash;we live right in the
middle of New York City&mdash;we don&rsquo;t have any
heavy drapes or rugs, and Mom never fries any
food because the doctors figure dust and smoke
make her asthma worse. I don&rsquo;t think it&rsquo;s dust;
I think it&rsquo;s Pop&rsquo;s roaring.</p>

<p>The big hassle that led to me getting Cat came
when I earned some extra money baby-sitting for
a little boy around the corner on Gramercy Park.
I spent the money on a Belafonte record. This
record has one piece about a father telling his
son about the birds and the bees. I think it&rsquo;s
funny. Pop blows his stack.</p>

<p>&ldquo;You&rsquo;re not going to play that stuff in this
house!&rdquo; he roars. &ldquo;Why aren&rsquo;t you outdoors, anyway?
Baby-sitting! Baby-talk records! When I
was your age, I made money on a newspaper-delivery
route, and my dog Jeff and I used to go
ten miles chasing rabbits on a good Saturday.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Pop,&rdquo; I say patiently, &ldquo;there are no rabbits
out on Third Avenue. Honest, there aren&rsquo;t.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Don&rsquo;t get fresh!&rdquo; Pop jerks the plug out of
the record player so hard the needle skips, which
probably wrecks my record. So I get mad and
start yelling too. Between rounds we both hear
Mom in the kitchen starting to wheeze.
</p>

<!--<pb n="003"/>--><anchor id="Pg003"/>
<p>Pop hisses, &ldquo;Now, see&mdash;you&rsquo;ve gone and upset
your mother!&rdquo;</p>

<p>I slam the record player shut, grab a stick and
ball, and run down the three flights of stairs to
the street.</p>

<p>This isn&rsquo;t the first time Pop and I have played
this scene, and there gets to be a pattern: When
I slam out of our house mad, I go along over to
my Aunt Kate&rsquo;s. She&rsquo;s not really my aunt. The
kids around here call her Crazy Kate the Cat
Woman because she walks along the street in
funny old clothes and sneakers talking to herself,
and she sometimes has half a dozen or more stray
cats living with her. I guess she does sound a
little looney, but it&rsquo;s just because she does things
her own way, and she doesn&rsquo;t give a hoot what
people think. She&rsquo;s sane, all right. In fact she
makes a lot better sense than my pop.</p>

<p>It was three or four years ago, when I was a
little kid, and I came tearing down our stairs
crying mad after some fight with Pop, that I first
met Kate. I plunged out of our door and into
the street without looking. At the same moment
I heard brakes scream and felt someone yank me
back by the scruff of my neck. I got dropped in
a heap on the sidewalk.
</p>

<!--<pb n="004"/>--><anchor id="Pg004"/>
<p>I looked up, and there was a shiny black car
with M.D. plates and Kate waving her umbrella
at the driver and shouting: &ldquo;Listen, Dr. Big
Shot, whose life are you saving? Can&rsquo;t you even
watch out for a sniveling little kid crossing the
street?&rdquo;</p>

<p>The doctor looked pretty sheepish, and so did
I. A few people on the sidewalk stopped to watch
and snicker at us. Our janitor Butch was there,
shaking his finger at me. Kate nodded to him and
told him she was taking me home to mop me up.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Yas&rsquo;m,&rdquo; said Butch. He says &ldquo;Yas&rsquo;m&rdquo; to all
ladies.</p>

<p>Kate dragged me along by the hand to her
apartment. She didn&rsquo;t say anything when we got
there, just dumped me in a chair with a couple
of kittens. Then she got me a cup of tea and a
bowl of cottage cheese.</p>

<p>That stopped me snuffling to ask, &ldquo;What do
I put the cottage cheese on?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Don&rsquo;t put it on anything. Just eat it. Eat a
bowl of it every day. Here, have an orange, too.
But no cookies or candy, none of that sweet,
starchy stuff. And no string beans. They&rsquo;re not
good for you.&rdquo;</p>

<p>My eyes must have popped, but I guess I knew
<!--<pb n="005"/>--><anchor id="Pg005"/>
right that first day that you don&rsquo;t argue with
Kate. I ate the cottage cheese&mdash;it doesn&rsquo;t really
have any taste anyway&mdash;and I sure have always
agreed with her about the string beans.</p>

<p>Off and on since then I&rsquo;ve seen quite a lot of
Kate. I&rsquo;d pass her on the street, chirruping to
some mangy old stray cat hiding under a car, and
he&rsquo;d always come out to be stroked. Sometimes
there&rsquo;d be a bunch of little kids dancing around
jeering at her and calling her a witch. It made
me feel real good and important to run them off.</p>

<p>Quite often I went with her to the A &amp; P and
helped her carry home the cat food and cottage
cheese and fruit. She talks to herself all the time
in the store, and if she thinks the peaches or
melons don&rsquo;t look good that day, she shouts clear
across the store to the manager. He comes across
and picks her out an extra good one, just to keep
the peace.</p>

<p>I introduced Kate to Mom, and they got along
real well. Kate&rsquo;s leery of most people, afraid
they&rsquo;ll make fun of her, I guess; my mom&rsquo;s not
leery of people, but she&rsquo;s shy, and what with
asthma and worrying about keeping me and Pop
calmed down, she doesn&rsquo;t go out much or make
dates with people. She and Kate would chat together
<!--<pb n="006"/>--><anchor id="Pg006"/>
in the stores or sitting on the stoop on a
sunny day. Kate shook her head over Mom&rsquo;s
asthma and said she&rsquo;d get over it if she ate cottage
cheese every day. Mom ate it for a while, but she
put mayonnaise on it, which Kate says is just like
poison.</p>

<p>The day of the fight with Pop about the Belafonte
record it&rsquo;s cold and windy out and there
are no kids in sight. I slam my ball back and forth
against the wall where it says &ldquo;No Ball Playing,&rdquo;
just to limber up and let off a little spite, and
then I go over to see Kate.</p>

<p>Kate has a permanent cat named Susan and
however many kittens Susan happens to have
just had. It varies. Usually there are a few other
temporary stray kittens in the apartment, but I
never saw any father cat there before. Today
Susan and her kittens are under the stove, and
Susan keeps hissing at a big tiger-striped tomcat
crouching under the sofa. He turns his head
away from her and looks like he never intended
to get mixed up with family life. For a stray cat
he&rsquo;s sleek and healthy-looking. Every time he
moves a whisker, Susan hisses again, warningly.
She believes in no visiting rights for fathers.</p>

<p>Kate pours me some tea and asks what&rsquo;s doing.
</p>

<!--<pb n="007"/>--><anchor id="Pg007"/>
<p>&ldquo;My pop is full of hot air, as usual,&rdquo; I say.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Takes one to know one,&rdquo; Kate says, catching
me off base. I change the subject.</p>

<p>&ldquo;How come the kittens&rsquo; pop is around the
house? I never saw a full-grown tom here
before.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;He saw me buying some cans of cat food, so
he followed me home. Susan isn&rsquo;t admitting she
ever knew him or ever wants to. I&rsquo;ll give him
another feed and send him on his way, I guess.
He&rsquo;s a handsome young fellow.&rdquo; Kate strokes
him between the ears, and he rotates his head.
Susan hisses.</p>

<p>He starts to pull back farther under the sofa.
Without stopping to think myself, or giving him
time to, I pick him up. Susan arches up and
spits. I can feel the muscles in his body tense up
as he gets ready to spring out of my lap. Then
he changes his mind and decides to take advantage
of the lap. He narrows his eyes and gives
Susan a bored look and turns his head to take
me in. After he&rsquo;s sized me up, he pretends he
only turned around to lick his back.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Cat,&rdquo; I say to him, &ldquo;how about coming home
with me?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Hah!&rdquo; Kate laughs. &ldquo;Your pop will throw
<!--<pb n="008"/>--><anchor id="Pg008"/>
him out faster than you can say &lsquo;good old Jeff.&rsquo;&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Yeah-h?&rdquo; I say it slowly and do some thinking.
Taking Cat home had been just a passing
thought, but right now I decide I&rsquo;ll really go to
the mat with Pop about this. He can have his
memories of good old Jeff and rabbit hunts, but
I&rsquo;m going to have me a tiger.</p>

<p>Aunt Kate gives me a can of cat food and a
box of litter, so Cat can stay in my room, because
I remember Mom probably gets asthma from
animals, too. Cat and I go home.</p>

<p>Pop does a lot of shouting and sputtering
when we get home, but I just put Cat down in
my room, and I try not to argue with him, so I
won&rsquo;t lose my temper. I promise I&rsquo;ll keep him
in my room and sweep up the cat hairs so Mom
won&rsquo;t have to.</p>

<p>As a final blast Pop says, &ldquo;I suppose you&rsquo;ll
get your exercise mouse hunting now. What are
you going to name the noble animal?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Look, Pop,&rdquo; I explain, &ldquo;I know he&rsquo;s a cat,
he knows he&rsquo;s a cat, and his name is Cat. And
even if you call him Honorable John Fitzgerald
Kennedy, he won&rsquo;t come when you call, and he
won&rsquo;t lick your hand, see?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;He&rsquo;d better not! And it&rsquo;s not my hand that&rsquo;s
<!--<pb n="009"/>--><anchor id="Pg009"/>
going to get licked around here in a minute,&rdquo;
Pop snaps.</p>

<p>&ldquo;All right, all right.&rdquo;</p>

<p>Actually, my pop sometimes jaws so long it&rsquo;d
be a relief if he did haul off and hit me, but he
never does.</p>

<p>We call it a draw for that day, and I have Cat.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<!--<pb n="010"/>--><anchor id="Pg010"/>
  <index index="toc" level1="&nbsp;2. Cat and the Underworld" />
  <index index="pdf"/>
  <head rend='right'>2</head>
<figure rend="width: 100%" url="images/image02.png">
  <figDesc>Illustration: Dave looking at Cat locked in cage.</figDesc>
</figure>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then>
    <p><lb/></p>
    <p rend='right'>CAT AND THE UNDERWORLD</p>
    <p><lb/></p>
  </then>
</pgIf>

<p>Cat makes himself at home in my room pretty
easily. Mostly he likes to be up on top of something,
so I put an old sweater on the bureau
beside my bed, and he sleeps up there. When
he wants me to wake up in the morning, he
jumps and lands in the middle of my stomach.
Believe me, cats don&rsquo;t always land lightly&mdash;only
when they want to. Anything a cat does,
he does only when he wants to. I like that.
</p>

<!--<pb n="011"/>--><anchor id="Pg011"/>
<p>When I&rsquo;m combing my hair in the morning,
sometimes he sits up there and looks down
his nose at my reflection in the mirror. He
appears to be taking inventory: &ldquo;Hmm, buckteeth;
sandy hair, smooth in front, cowlick in
back; brown eyes, can&rsquo;t see in the dark worth a
nickel; hickeys on the chin. Too bad.&rdquo;</p>

<p>I look back at him in the mirror and say,
&ldquo;O.K., black face, yellow eyes, and one white
whisker. Where&rsquo;d you get that one white
whisker?&rdquo;</p>

<p>He catches sight of himself in the mirror, and
his tail twitches momentarily. He seems to know
it&rsquo;s not really another cat, but his claws come out
and he taps the mirror softly, just to make sure.</p>

<p>When I&rsquo;m lying on the bed reading, sometimes
he will curl up between my knees and the
book. But after a few days I can see he&rsquo;s getting
more and more restless. It gets so I can&rsquo;t listen
to a record, for the noise of him scratching on
the rug. I can&rsquo;t let him loose in the apartment,
at least until we make sure Mom doesn&rsquo;t get
asthma, so I figure I better reintroduce him to
the great outdoors in the city. One nice Sunday
morning in April we go down and sit on the
stoop.
</p>

<!--<pb n="012"/>--><anchor id="Pg012"/>
<p>Cat sits down, very tall and neat and pear-shaped,
and closes his eyes about halfway. He
glances at the street like it isn&rsquo;t good enough for
him. After a while, condescending, he eases
down the steps and lies on a sunny, dusty spot in
the middle of the sidewalk. People walking have
to step around him, and he squints at them.</p>

<p>Then he gets up, quick, looks over his
shoulder at nothing, and shoots down the stairs
to the cellar. I take a look to see where he&rsquo;s going,
and he is pacing slowly toward the backyard,
head down, a tiger on the prowl. I figure I&rsquo;ll sit
in the sun and finish my science-fiction magazine
before I go after him.</p>

<p>When I do, he&rsquo;s not in sight, and the janitor
tells me he jumped up on the wall and probably
down into one of the other yards. I look around
a while and call, but he&rsquo;s not in sight, and I go
up to lunch. Along toward evening Cat scratches
at the door and comes in, as if he&rsquo;d done it all
his life.</p>

<p>This gets to be a routine. Sometimes he
doesn&rsquo;t even come home at night, and he&rsquo;s sitting
on the doormat when I get the milk in the morning,
looking offended.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Is it my fault you stayed out all night?&rdquo; I
ask him.
</p>

<!--<pb n="013"/>--><anchor id="Pg013"/>
<p>He sticks his tail straight up and marches down
the hall to the kitchen, where he waits for me
to open the milk and dish out the cat food. Then
he goes to bed.</p>

<p>One morning he&rsquo;s not there when I open the
door, and he still hasn&rsquo;t showed up when I get
back from school. I get worried and go down
to talk to Butch.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Wa-a-l,&rdquo; says Butch, &ldquo;sometimes that cat sit
and talk to me a little, but most times he go on
over to Twenty-first Street, where he sit and talk
to his lady friend. Turned cold last night, lot of
buildings put on heat and closed up their basements.
Maybe he got locked in somewheres.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Which building&rsquo;s his friend live in?&rdquo; I ask.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Forty-six, the big one. His friend&rsquo;s a little
black-and-white cat, sort of belongs to the night
man over there. He feeds her.&rdquo;</p>

<p>I go around to Twenty-first Street and case
Forty-six, which is a pretty fair-looking building
with a striped awning and a doorman who
saunters out front and looks around every few
minutes.</p>

<p>While I&rsquo;m watching, a grocery boy comes
along pushing his cart and goes down some
stairs into the basement with his carton of
groceries. This gives me an idea. I&rsquo;ll give the
<!--<pb n="014"/>--><anchor id="Pg014"/>
boy time to get started up in the elevator, and
then I&rsquo;ll go down in the basement and hunt for
Cat. If someone comes along and gets sore, I
can always play dumb.</p>

<p>I go down, and the coast is clear. The elevator&rsquo;s
gone up, and I walk softly past and
through a big room where the tenants leave
their baby carriages and bicycles. After this the
cellar stretches off into several corridors, lit by
twenty-watt bulbs dangling from the ceiling.
You can hardly see anything. The corridors go
between wire storage cages, where the tenants
keep stuff like trunks and old cribs and parakeet
cages. They&rsquo;re all locked.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Me-ow, meow, me-ow!&rdquo; Unmistakably Cat,
and angry.</p>

<p>The sound comes from the end of one corridor,
and I fumble along, peering into each
cage to try to see a tiger cat in a shadowy hole.
Fortunately his eyes glow and he opens his
mouth for another meow, and I see him locked
inside one of the cages before I come to the end
of the corridor. I don&rsquo;t know how he got in or
how I&rsquo;m going to get him out.</p>

<p>While I&rsquo;m thinking, Cat&rsquo;s eyes flick away from
me to the right, then back to me. Cat&rsquo;s not making
<!--<pb n="015"/>--><anchor id="Pg015"/>
any noise, and neither am I, but something
is. It&rsquo;s just a tiny rustle, or a breath, but I have
a creepy feeling someone is standing near us.
Way down at the end of the cellar a shadow
moves a little, and I can see it has a white splotch&mdash;a
face. It&rsquo;s a man, and he comes toward me.</p>

<p>I don&rsquo;t know why any of the building men
would be way back there, but that&rsquo;s who I figure
it is, so I start explaining.</p>

<p>&ldquo;I was just hunting for my cat ... I mean,
he&rsquo;s got locked in one of these cages. I just want
to get him out.&rdquo;</p>

<p>The guy lets his breath out, slow, as if he&rsquo;s
been holding it quite a while. I realize he doesn&rsquo;t
belong in that cellar either, and he&rsquo;s been scared
of me.</p>

<p>He moves forward, saying &ldquo;Sh-h-h&rdquo; very
quietly. He&rsquo;s taller than I am, and I can&rsquo;t see
what he really looks like, but I&rsquo;m sure he&rsquo;s sort
of a kid, maybe eighteen or so.</p>

<p>He looks at the padlock on the cage and says,
&ldquo;Huh, cheap!&rdquo; He takes a paper clip out of his
pocket and opens it out, and I think maybe he
has a penknife, too, and next thing I know the
padlock is open.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Gee, how&rsquo;d you do that?&rdquo;
</p>

<!--<pb n="016"/>--><anchor id="Pg016"/>
<p>&ldquo;Sh-h-h. A guy showed me how. You better
get your cat and scram.&rdquo;</p>

<p>Golly, I wonder, maybe the guy is a burglar,
and that gives me another creepy feeling. But
would a burglar be taking time out to get a
kid&rsquo;s cat free?</p>

<p>&ldquo;Well, thanks for the cat. See you around,&rdquo;
I say.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Sh-h-h. I don&rsquo;t live around here. Hurry up,
before we both get caught.&rdquo;</p>

<p>Maybe he&rsquo;s a real burglar with a gun, even, I
think, and by the time I dodge past the elevators
and get out in the cold April wind, the sweat
down my back is freezing. I give Cat a long
lecture on staying out of basements. After all, I
can&rsquo;t count on having a burglar handy to get
him out every time.</p>

<p>Back home we put some nice jailhouse blues
on the record player, and we both stretch out on
the bed to think. The guy didn&rsquo;t really <hi rend='italic'>look</hi> like
a burglar. And he didn&rsquo;t talk &ldquo;dese and dose.&rdquo;
Maybe real burglars don&rsquo;t all talk that way&mdash;only
the ones on TV. Still, he sure picked that lock
fast, and he was sure down in that cellar for
some reason of his own.</p>

<p>Maybe I ought to let someone know. I figure
<!--<pb n="017"/>--><anchor id="Pg017"/>
I&rsquo;ll test Pop out, just casual like. &ldquo;Some queer-looking
types hanging around this neighborhood,&rdquo;
I say at dinner. &ldquo;I saw a tough-looking
guy hanging around Number Forty-six this
afternoon. Might have been a burglar, even.&rdquo;</p>

<p>I figure Pop&rsquo;ll at least ask me what he was
doing, and maybe I&rsquo;ll tell him the whole thing&mdash;about
Cat and the cage. But Pop says, &ldquo;In case
you didn&rsquo;t know it, burglars do not all look like
Humphrey Bogart, and they don&rsquo;t wear signs.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Thanks for the news,&rdquo; I say and go on eating
my dinner. Even if Pop does make me sore,
I&rsquo;m not going to pass up steak and onions, which
we don&rsquo;t have very often.</p>

<p>However, the next day I&rsquo;m walking along
Twenty-first Street and I see the super of Forty-six
standing by the back entrance, so I figure I&rsquo;ll
try again. I say to him, &ldquo;Us kids were playing ball
here yesterday, and we saw a strange-looking guy
sneak into your cellar. It wasn&rsquo;t a delivery boy.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Yeah? You sure it wasn&rsquo;t you or one of your
juvenile pals trying to swipe a bike? How come
you have to play ball right here?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;I don&rsquo;t swipe bikes. I got one of my own.
New. A Raleigh. Better than any junk you got
in there.&rdquo;
</p>

<!--<pb n="018"/>--><anchor id="Pg018"/>
<p>&ldquo;What d&rsquo;you know about what I got in there,
wise guy?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Aw, forget it.&rdquo; I realize he&rsquo;s just getting
suspicious of me. That&rsquo;s what comes of trying
to be a big public-spirited citizen. I decide my
burglar, whoever he is, is a lot nicer than the
super, and I hope he got a fat haul.</p>

<p>Next day it looks like maybe he did just that.
The local paper, <hi rend='italic'>Town and Village</hi>, has a headline:
&ldquo;Gramercy Park Cellar Robbed.&rdquo; I read
down the article:</p>

<p>&ldquo;The superintendent, Fred Snood, checked
the cellar storage cages, after a passing youth
hinted to him that there had been a robbery.
He found one cage open and a suitcase missing.
Police theorize that the youth may have been
the burglar, or an accomplice with a guilty
conscience or a grudge, and they are hunting
him for questioning. Mr. Snood described him
as about sixteen years of age, medium height,
with a long &lsquo;ducktail&rsquo; haircut, and wearing a
heavy black sweater. They are also checking
second-hand stores for the stolen suitcase.&rdquo;</p>

<p>The burglar stole a suitcase with valuable
papers and some silver and jewelry in it. But
the guy they were hunting for&mdash;I read the paragraph
over and feel green. That&rsquo;s me. I get up
<!--<pb n="019"/>--><anchor id="Pg019"/>
and look in the mirror. In other circumstances
I&rsquo;d like being taken for sixteen instead of fourteen,
which I am. I smooth my hair and squint
at the back of it. The ducktail is fine.</p>

<p>Slowly I peel off my black sweater, which I
wear practically all the time, and stuff it in my
bottom drawer, under my bathing suit. But if I
want to walk around the street without worrying
about every cop, I&rsquo;ll have to do more than
that. I put on a shirt and necktie and suit jacket
and stick a cap on my head. I head uptown on
the subway. At Sixty-eighth Street I get off and
find a barbershop.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Butch cut,&rdquo; I tell the guy.</p>

<p>&ldquo;That&rsquo;s right. I&rsquo;ll trim you nice and neat. Get
rid of all this stuff.&rdquo;</p>

<p>And while he chatters on like an idiot, I have
to watch three months&rsquo; work go snip, snip on
the floor. Then I have to pay for it. At home I
get the same routine. Pop looks at my Ivy-League
disguise and says, &ldquo;Why, you may look
positively human some day!&rdquo;</p>

<p>Two days later I find out I could&rsquo;ve kept my
hair. <hi rend='italic'>Town and Village</hi> has a new story: &ldquo;Nab
Cellar Thief Returning Loot. &lsquo;Just A Bet,&rsquo;
He Says.&rdquo;</p>

<p>The story is pretty interesting. The guy I met
<!--<pb n="020"/>--><anchor id="Pg020"/>
in the cellar is named Tom Ransom, and he is
nineteen and just sort of floating around in the
city. He doesn&rsquo;t seem to have any family. The
police kept a detective watching Number Forty-six,
and pretty soon they see Tom walking along
with the stolen suitcase. He drops it inside the
delivery entrance and walks on, but the cop
collars him. I suppose if it hadn&rsquo;t been for me
shooting my big mouth off to the super, the
police wouldn&rsquo;t have been watching the neighborhood.
I feel sort of responsible.</p>

<p>The story in the paper goes on to say this guy
was broke and hunting for a job, and some other
guy dares him to snatch something out of a cellar
and finally bets him ten dollars, so he does it.
He gets out and finds the suitcase has a lot of
stocks and legal papers and table silver in it,
and he&rsquo;s scared stiff. So he figures to drop it back
where it came from. The paper says he&rsquo;s held
over to appear before some magistrate in
Adolescent Court.</p>

<p>I wonder, would they send a guy to jail for
that? Or if they turn him loose, what does he do?
It must be lousy to be in this city without any
family or friends.</p>

<p>At that point I get the idea I&rsquo;ll write him a
letter. After all, Cat and I sort of got him into
<!--<pb n="021"/>--><anchor id="Pg021"/>
the soup. So I look up the name of the magistrate
and spend about half an hour poring through
the phone book, under &ldquo;New York, City of,&rdquo; to
get an address. I wonder whether to address him
as &ldquo;Tom&rdquo; or &ldquo;Mr. Ransom.&rdquo; Finally I write:</p>

<p><lb/><hi rend='italic'>Dear Tom Ransom:</hi></p>

<p><hi rend='italic'>I am the kid you met in the cellar at Number
Forty-six Gramercy, and I certainly thank you
for unlocking that cage and getting my cat out.
Cat is fine. I am sorry you got in trouble with
the police. It sounds to me like you were only trying
to return the stuff and do right. My father is
a lawyer, if you would like one. I guess he&rsquo;s
pretty good. Or if you would like to write me
anyway, here is my address: 150 East 22 St. I read
in the paper that your family don&rsquo;t live in New
York, which is why I thought you might like
someone to write to.</hi></p>

<p rend='right'><hi rend='italic'>Yours sincerely,</hi><lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Dave Mitchell</hi><lb/>
<lb/></p>

<p>Now that I&rsquo;m a free citizen again, I dig out my
black sweater, look disgustedly at the butch haircut,
and go out to mail my letter.</p>

<p>Later on I get into a stickball game again on
<!--<pb n="022"/>--><anchor id="Pg022"/>
Twenty-first Street. Cat comes along and sits up
high on a stoop across the street, where he can
watch the ball game and the tame dogs being led
by on their leashes. That big brain, the super of
Forty-six, is standing by the delivery entrance,
looking sour as usual.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Got any burglars in your basement these
days?&rdquo; I yell to him while I&rsquo;m jogging around the
bases on a long hit.</p>

<p>He looks at me and my short haircut and
scratches his own bald egg. &ldquo;Where&rsquo;d I see you?&rdquo;
he asks suspiciously.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Oh&mdash;Cat and I, we get around,&rdquo; I say.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<!--<pb n="023"/>--><anchor id="Pg023"/>
  <index index="toc" level1="&nbsp;3. Cat and Coney" />
  <index index="pdf"/>
  <head rend='right'>3</head>
<figure rend="width: 100%" url="images/image03.png">
  <figDesc>Illustration: Dave, Cat, and Nick running on the beach.</figDesc>
</figure>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then>
    <p><lb/></p>
    <p rend='right'>CAT AND CONEY</p>
    <p><lb/></p>
  </then>
</pgIf>

<p>Nick and I have been friends pretty much since I
can remember. Our mothers used to trade turns
fetching us from kindergarten. Nick lives
around the corner on Third Avenue, upstairs
over the grocery store his old man runs. If anyone
asked me <hi rend='italic'>how come</hi> we&rsquo;re friends, I couldn&rsquo;t
exactly say. We&rsquo;re just together most of the time.</p>

<p>Neither of us is a real whiz at sports, but we
used to roller-skate and play a little king and
<!--<pb n="024"/>--><anchor id="Pg024"/>
stickball and ride our bikes around exploring.
One time when we were about ten, we rode way
over to Twelfth Avenue at the Hudson River,
where the <hi rend='italic'>Queen Mary</hi> docks. This is about the
only time I remember my mom getting really
angry. She said Pop ought to take my bike away
from me, and he did, but only for about a week.
Nick and I still ride bikes a lot. Otherwise we
sit and do our homework or play chess and listen
to records.</p>

<p>Another reason we&rsquo;re friends is because of this
creepy little kid who lived down toward the
corner, between me and Nick. He always tagged
along, wanting to play with us, and of course in
the end he always fouled up the game or fell
down and started to cry. Then his big brother
came rushing out, usually with another big guy
along, and they figured they were entitled to
beat us up for hurting little Joey.</p>

<p>After a while it looked to me as if Joey just
worked as a lookout, and the minute me or Nick
showed up on the block, one of the big guys came
to run us off. They did little things like throwing
sticks into our bike spokes and pretending it was
just a joke. Nick and I used to plot all kinds of
ways to get even with them, but in the end we
<!--<pb n="025"/>--><anchor id="Pg025"/>
mostly decided it was easier to walk around the
block the long way to get to each other&rsquo;s houses.
I&rsquo;m not much on fighting, and neither is Nick&mdash;&rsquo;specially
not with guys bigger than us.</p>

<p>Summers, up in the country, the kids seem to
be all the time wrestling and punching, half for
fun and half not. If I walk past some strange kid
my age up there, he almost always tries to get me
into a fight. I don&rsquo;t get it. Maybe it&rsquo;s because
sidewalks are uncomfortable for fighting, but we
just don&rsquo;t do much scrapping for fun. The only
couple of fights I ever had, I was real mad.</p>

<p>Come spring, Nick and I got restless hanging
around the street, with nothing to do but stickball
and baiting the super at Forty-six. It was
so easy to get him sore, it wasn&rsquo;t even fun. Cat
stayed out of that basement, but I wanted to get
him really out in the open, where he could chase
squirrels or something.</p>

<p>One day we rode our bikes up to Central Park.
I put Cat in a wicker hamper and tied it on the
back of my bike. He meowed a lot, and people
on the street would look at me and then do a
double take when they heard him.</p>

<p>We got up to Central Park and into a place
they call The Horseshoe, because the parking
<!--<pb n="026"/>--><anchor id="Pg026"/>
area is that shape. I opened the lid a crack to look
at Cat. He hissed at me, the first time he ever
did. I looked around and thought, Gee, if I let
him loose, he could go anywhere, even over into
the woods, and I might never catch him. There
were a lot of hoody looking kids around, and I
could see if I ever left my bike a second to chase
Cat, they&rsquo;d snatch the bike. So I didn&rsquo;t let Cat
out, and I wolfed my sandwich and we went
home. Nick was pretty disgusted.</p>

<p>Then we hit a hot Saturday, the first one in
May, and I get an idea. I find Nick and say,
&ldquo;Let&rsquo;s put Cat and some sandwiches in the basket
and hop the subway out to Coney.&rdquo;</p>

<p>Nick says, &ldquo;Why bring Cat? He wrecked the
last expedition.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;I like to take him places, and this won&rsquo;t be
like Central Park. No one&rsquo;s at Coney this time of
year. He can chase around on the beach and hunt
sand crabs.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Why do I have to have a nut for a friend?&rdquo;
Nick moans. &ldquo;Well, anyway, I&rsquo;m keeping my
sandwich in my pocket, not in any old cat
basket.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Who cares where you keep your crumby
sandwich?&rdquo;
</p>

<!--<pb n="027"/>--><anchor id="Pg027"/>
<p>So we went. Lots of people might think Coney
Island is ugly, with all the junky-looking booths
and billboards. But when you turn your back on
them and look out at the ocean, it&rsquo;s the same
ocean as on a deserted beach. I kick off my shoes
and stand with my feet in the ice water and the
sun hot on my chest. Looking out at the horizon
with its few ships and some sea gulls and planes
overhead, I think: It&rsquo;s mine, all mine. I could go
anywhere in the world, I could. Maybe I will.</p>

<p>Nick throws water down my neck. He only
understands infinity on math papers. I let Cat
out of the basket and strip off my splashed shirt
and chase Nick along the edge of the water. No
need to worry about Cat. He chases right along
with us, and every time a wave catches his feet
he hisses and hightails it up the beach. Then he
rolls himself in the hot, dry sand and gets up
and shakes. There are a few other groups of
people dotted along the beach. A big mutt dog
comes and sniffs Cat and gets a right and a left
scratch to the nose. He yelps and runs for home.
Cat discovers sand crabs. Nick and I roll around
in the sand and wrestle, and after a while we get
hungry, so we go back where we left the basket.
Cat is content to let me carry him.
</p>

<!--<pb n="028"/>--><anchor id="Pg028"/>
<p>Three girls are having a picnic right near our
basket. One yells to the others, &ldquo;Hey, look! The
guy went swimming with his cat!&rdquo;</p>

<p>Cat jumps down, turns his back on them, and
humps himself around on my sweater until he is
settled for a nap. I turn my back on the girls,
too, and look out at the ocean.</p>

<p>Still, it&rsquo;s not the same as it would have been
a year ago. Then Nick and I would either have
moved away from the girls or thrown sand at
them.</p>

<p>We just sit and eat our sandwiches. Nick looks
over at them pretty often and whispers to me
how old do I think they are. I can&rsquo;t tell about
girls. Some of the ones in our class at school
look about twenty-five, but then you see mothers
pushing baby carriages on the street who look
about fifteen.</p>

<p>One of the girls catches Nick&rsquo;s eye and giggles.
&ldquo;Hi, there, whatcha watching?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;I&rsquo;m a bird watcher,&rdquo; says Nick. &ldquo;Seen any
birds?&rdquo;</p>

<p>The girls drift over our way. The one that
spoke first is a redhead. The one who seems to be
the leader is a big blonde in a real short skirt
and hair piled up high in a bird&rsquo;s nest. Maybe
<!--<pb n="029"/>--><anchor id="Pg029"/>
that&rsquo;s what started Nick bird-watching. The
third girl is sort of quiet-looking, with brown
hair, I guess.</p>

<p>&ldquo;You want a couple of cupcakes? You can have
mine. I&rsquo;m going on a diet,&rdquo; says the blonde.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Thanks,&rdquo; says Nick. &ldquo;I was thinking of going
after some cokes.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Why waste time thinking? You might hurt
your head,&rdquo; says the redhead.</p>

<p>The third girl bends down and strokes Cat
between the ears very gently. She says, &ldquo;What&rsquo;s
his name?&rdquo;</p>

<p>I explain to her about why Cat is Cat. She sits
down and picks up a piece of seaweed to dangle
over his nose. Cat makes a couple of sleepy
swipes at it and then stretches luxuriously while
she strokes him. The other kids get to talking,
and we tell each other our names and where we
go to school and all that stuff.</p>

<p>Then Nick gets back on the subject of going
for cokes. I don&rsquo;t really want to stay there alone
with the girls, so I say I&rsquo;ll go. I tell Nick to watch
Cat, and the girl who is petting him says, &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t
worry, I won&rsquo;t let him run away.&rdquo;</p>

<p>It&rsquo;s a good thing she&rsquo;s there, because by the
time I get back with the cokes, which no one
<!--<pb n="030"/>--><anchor id="Pg030"/>
offers to pay me back for, Nick and the other
two girls are halfway down the beach. Mary&mdash;that&rsquo;s
her name&mdash;says, &ldquo;I never saw a cat at the
beach before, but he seems to like it. Where&rsquo;d
you get him?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;He&rsquo;s a stray. I got him from an old lady who&rsquo;s
sort of a nut about cats. Come on, I&rsquo;ll see if I can
get him to chase waves for you. He was doing it
earlier.&rdquo;</p>

<p>We are running along in the waves when the
other kids come back. The big blonde kicks up
water at me and yells, &ldquo;Race you!&rdquo;</p>

<p>So I chase, and just as I&rsquo;m going to catch up,
she stops short so I crash into her and we both
fall down. This seems to be what she had in
mind, but I bet the other kids are watching and
I feel silly. I roll away and get up and go back to
Cat.</p>

<p>While we drink cokes the blonde and the
redhead say they want to go to the movies.</p>

<p>&ldquo;What&rsquo;s on?&rdquo; Nick asks.</p>

<p>&ldquo;There&rsquo;s a Sinatra thing at the neighborhood,&rdquo;
the blonde tells him, and he looks interested.</p>

<p>&ldquo;I can&rsquo;t,&rdquo; I say. &ldquo;I&rsquo;ve got Cat. Besides, it&rsquo;s too
late. Mom&rsquo;d think I&rsquo;d fallen into the subway.&rdquo;
</p>

<!--<pb n="031"/>--><anchor id="Pg031"/>
<p>&ldquo;I told you that cat was a mistake,&rdquo; says Nick.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Put him in the basket and call your mother
and tell her your watch stopped,&rdquo; says the redhead.
She comes over and trickles sand down my
neck. &ldquo;Come on, it&rsquo;d be fun. We don&rsquo;t have to
sit in the kids&rsquo; section. We all look sixteen.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Nah, I can&rsquo;t.&rdquo; I get up and shake the sand
out.</p>

<p>Nick looks disgusted, but he doesn&rsquo;t want to
stay alone. He says to the blonde, &ldquo;Write me
down your phone number, and we&rsquo;ll do it another
day when this nut hasn&rsquo;t got his cat along.&rdquo;</p>

<p>She writes down the phone number, and the
redhead pouts because I&rsquo;m not asking for hers.
The girls get ready to leave, and Mary pats Cat
good-bye and waves to me. She says, &ldquo;Bring him
again. He&rsquo;s nice.&rdquo;</p>

<p>We get on the subway and Cat meows crossly
at being shut in his basket. Nick pokes the basket
with his toes.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Shut up, nuisance,&rdquo; he says.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<!--<pb n="032"/>--><anchor id="Pg032"/>
  <index index="toc" level1="&nbsp;4. Fight" />
  <index index="pdf"/>
  <head rend='right'>4</head>
<figure rend="width: 100%" url="images/image04.png">
  <figDesc>Illustration: Dave and Nick fighting on the ground.</figDesc>
</figure>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then>
    <p><lb/></p>
    <p rend='right'>FIGHT</p>
    <p><lb/></p>
  </then>
</pgIf>

<p>I actually get a letter back from Tom Ransom.
It says: &ldquo;Thanks for your letter. The Youth
Board got me a room in the Y on Twenty-third
Street. Maybe I&rsquo;ll come say Hello some day.
They&rsquo;re going to help me get a job this summer,
so I don&rsquo;t need a lawyer. Thanks anyway. Meow
to Cat. Best, Tom.&rdquo;</p>

<p>I go over to Nick&rsquo;s house to show him the
letter. I&rsquo;d told him about Tom getting Cat out
<!--<pb n="033"/>--><anchor id="Pg033"/>
of the cellar and getting arrested, but Nick always
acted like he didn&rsquo;t really believe it. So
when he sees the letter, he has to admit Cat and
I really got into something. Not everyone gets
letters from guys who have been arrested.</p>

<p>One thing about Nick sort of gripes me. He
has to think up all the plans. Anything I&rsquo;ve done
that he doesn&rsquo;t know about, he downgrades.
Also, I always have to go to <hi rend='italic'>his</hi> house. He never
comes to mine, except once in a coon&rsquo;s age when
I have a new record I won&rsquo;t bring to his house
because his machine stinks and he never buys a
new needle.</p>

<p>It&rsquo;s not that I don&rsquo;t like his house. His mom is
pretty nice, and boy, can she cook! Just an
ordinary Saturday for lunch she makes pizza or
real good spaghetti, and she has homemade
cookies and nut cake sitting around after school.
She also talks and waves her arms and shouts
orders at us kids, but all good-natured-like, so we
just kid her along and go on with what we&rsquo;re
doing.</p>

<p>She&rsquo;s about the opposite of my mom. Pop does
the shouting in our house, and except for the one
hassle about bike-riding on Twelfth Avenue,
Mom doesn&rsquo;t even tell me what to do much.
<!--<pb n="034"/>--><anchor id="Pg034"/>
She&rsquo;s quiet, and pretty often she doesn&rsquo;t feel
good, so maybe I think more than most kids that
I ought to do things her way without being told.</p>

<p>Also, my mom is always home and always
ready to listen if you got something griping you,
like when a teacher blames you for something
you didn&rsquo;t do. Some kids I know, they have to
phone a string of places to find their mother, and
then she scolds them for interrupting her.</p>

<p>Mom likes to cook, and she gets up some good
meals for holidays, but she doesn&rsquo;t go at it all
the time, the way Nick&rsquo;s mother does. So maybe
Nick doesn&rsquo;t come to my house because we
haven&rsquo;t got all that good stuff sitting around. I
don&rsquo;t think that&rsquo;s it, really, though. He just likes
to be boss.</p>

<p>One day, a couple of weeks after we went to
Coney, he does come along with me. We pick up
a couple of cokes and pears at his pop&rsquo;s store.</p>

<p>Cat is sitting on my front stoop, and he jumps
down and rubs between my legs and goes up the
stairs ahead of us.</p>

<p>&ldquo;See? He knows when school gets out then it&rsquo;s
time to eat. That&rsquo;s why I like to come home,&rdquo; I
tell Nick.</p>

<p>We say &ldquo;Hi&rdquo; to Mom, and I get out the cat
<!--<pb n="035"/>--><anchor id="Pg035"/>
food while Nick opens his coke. &ldquo;You know
those girls we ran into over on Coney Island?&rdquo;
he says.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Yeah.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Well, I got the blonde&rsquo;s phone number, so
Sunday when I was hacking around with nothing
to do, I called her up.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Yeah? What for?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;You stupid or something? To talk. So she
yacked away a good while, and finally I asked
her why didn&rsquo;t she come over next Saturday, we
could go to a movie or something.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Yeah.&rdquo; I was working on my pear, a very
juicy one.</p>

<p>&ldquo;That all you can say? So she says, well, she
might, if she can get her girl friend to come too,
but she doesn&rsquo;t want to come alone, and her
mother wouldn&rsquo;t let her anyway.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Which one?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Which one what?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Which girl friend?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Oh. You remember, the other one we were
kidding around with at the beach, the redhead.
So I said, O.K., I&rsquo;d see if I could get you to come
too. I said I&rsquo;d call her back.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Hmp. I don&rsquo;t know.&rdquo;
</p>

<!--<pb n="036"/>--><anchor id="Pg036"/>
<p>&ldquo;What d&rsquo;you mean, you don&rsquo;t know?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;How do I know if I like that girl? I hardly
even <hi rend='italic'>talked</hi> to her. Anyway, it sounds like a date.
I don&rsquo;t want a date. If they just happen to come
over, I guess it&rsquo;s all right.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;So shall I tell them it&rsquo;s O.K. for Saturday?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Hmm.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;It&rsquo;s nice you learned a new word.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Do I have to pay for the girl at the movies?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Cheapskate. Maybe if you just stand around
saying &lsquo;Hmm,&rsquo; she&rsquo;ll buy her own. O.K.?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;O.K. But this whole thing is your idea, and
if it stinks it&rsquo;s going to be your fault.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Boy, what an enthusiast! Come on, let&rsquo;s play
a record and do the math.&rdquo;</p>

<p>Nick is better at math than I am, so I agree.</p>

<p>Saturday morning at ten o&rsquo;clock Nick turns
up at my house in a white shirt and slicked-down
hair. Pop whistles. &ldquo;On Saturday, yet! You got
a girl or something?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Yessir!&rdquo; says Nick, and he gives my T-shirt a
dirty look. I go put a sweater over it and run
a comb through my hair, but I&rsquo;m hanged if I&rsquo;ll
go out looking like this is a big deal.</p>

<p>&ldquo;We&rsquo;re going to a movie down at the Academy,&rdquo;
I tell my family.</p>

<p>&ldquo;What&rsquo;s there?&rdquo; Pop asks.
</p>

<!--<pb n="037"/>--><anchor id="Pg037"/>
<p>&ldquo;A new horror show,&rdquo; says Nick. &ldquo;And an old
Disney.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Is it really a new horror show?&rdquo; I ask Nick,
because I think I&rsquo;ve seen every one that&rsquo;s been
in town.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Yup. Just opened. <hi rend='italic'>The Gold Bug.</hi> Some guy
wrote it&mdash;I mean in a book once&mdash;but it&rsquo;s supposed
to be great. Make the girls squeal anyway.
I love that.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Hmm.&rdquo; I just like horror shows anyway,
whether girls squeal or not.</p>

<p>&ldquo;You&rsquo;ll be the life of the party with that
&lsquo;Hmm&rsquo; routine.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;It&rsquo;s <hi rend='italic'>your</hi> party.&rdquo; I shrug.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Well, you could at least <hi rend='italic'>try</hi>.&rdquo;</p>

<p>We hang around the subway kiosk on Fourteenth
Street, where Nick said he&rsquo;d meet them.
After half an hour they finally show up.</p>

<p>It&rsquo;s nice and sunny, and we see a crowd
bunched up over in Union Square, so we wander
over. A shaggy-haired, bearded character is making
a speech all about &ldquo;They,&rdquo; the bad guys. A
lot of sleepy bums are sitting around letting the
speech roll off their ears.</p>

<p>&ldquo;What is he, a nut or something?&rdquo; the blonde
asks.</p>

<p>&ldquo;A Commie, maybe,&rdquo; I say. &ldquo;They&rsquo;re always
<!--<pb n="038"/>--><anchor id="Pg038"/>
giving speeches down here. Willie Sutton, the
bank robber, used to sit down here and listen,
too. That&rsquo;s where somebody put the finger on
him.&rdquo;</p>

<p>The girls look at each other and laugh like
crazy, as if I&rsquo;d said something real funny. I catch
Nick&rsquo;s eye and glare. O.K., I <hi rend='italic'>tried</hi>. After this I&rsquo;ll
stick to &ldquo;Hmm.&rdquo;</p>

<p>A beard who is listening to the speech turns
and glares at us and says, &ldquo;Shush!&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Aw, go shave yourself!&rdquo; says Nick, and the
girls go off in more hoots. Nick starts herding
them toward Fourteenth Street, and I follow
along.</p>

<p>At the Academy Nick goes up to the ticket
window, and the girls immediately fade out to
go read the posters and snicker together. I can
see they&rsquo;re not figuring to pay for any tickets, so
I cough up for two.</p>

<p>Nick and I try to saunter up to the balcony the
way we always do, but the girls are giggling and
dropping their popcorn, so the matron spots us
and motions. &ldquo;Down here!&rdquo; She flashes her light
in our eyes, and I feel like a convict while we get
packed in with all the kids in the under-sixteen
section.
</p>

<!--<pb n="039"/>--><anchor id="Pg039"/>
<p>Nick goes in first, then the blonde, then the
redhead and me. The minute things start getting
scary, she tries to grab me, but I stick my hands
in my pockets and say, &ldquo;Aw, it&rsquo;s just a picture.&rdquo;
She looks disgusted.</p>

<p>The next scary bit, she tries to hang onto her
girl friend, but the blonde is already glued onto
Nick. Redhead lets out a loud sigh, and I wish I
hadn&rsquo;t ever got into this deal. I can&rsquo;t even enjoy
the picture.</p>

<p>We suffer through the two pictures. The little
kids make such a racket you can hardly hear,
and the matron keeps shining the light in your
eyes so you can&rsquo;t see. She shines it on the blonde,
who is practically sitting in Nick&rsquo;s lap, and hisses
at her to get back. I&rsquo;m not going to do this again,
ever.</p>

<p>We go out and Nick says, &ldquo;Let&rsquo;s have a coke.&rdquo;
He&rsquo;s walking along with the blonde, and instead
of walking beside me the redhead tries to catch
hold of his other arm. This sort of burns me up.
I mean, I don&rsquo;t really <hi rend='italic'>like</hi> her, but I paid for her
and everything.</p>

<p>Nick shakes her off and calls over his shoulder
to me, &ldquo;Come on, chicken, pull your own
weight!&rdquo;
</p>

<!--<pb n="040"/>--><anchor id="Pg040"/>
<p>The girls laugh, on cue as usual, and I begin
getting really sore. Nick got me into this. The
least he can do is shut up.</p>

<p>We walk into a soda bar, and I slap down
thirty cents and say, &ldquo;Two cokes, please.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Hey, hey! The last of the big spenders!&rdquo; says
Nick. More laughter. I&rsquo;d just as soon sock him
right now, but I pick up my money and say,
&ldquo;O.K., wise guy, treat&rsquo;s on you.&rdquo; Nick shrugs and
tosses down a buck as if he had hundreds of
them.</p>

<p>The two girls drink their cokes and talk across
Nick. I finish mine in two or three gulps, and
finally we can walk them to the subway. Nick is
gabbing away about how he&rsquo;ll come out to
Coney one weekend, and I&rsquo;m standing there
with my hands in my pockets.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Goo&rsquo;bye, Bashful!&rdquo; coos the redhead to me,
and the two of them disappear, cackling, down
the steps. I start across Fourteenth Street as soon
as the light changes, without bothering to look
if Nick is coming. He can go rot.</p>

<p>Along Union Square he&rsquo;s beside me, acting
as if everything is peachy fine dandy. &ldquo;That was
a great show. Pretty good fun, huh?&rdquo;
</p>

<!--<pb n="041"/>--><anchor id="Pg041"/>
<p>I just keep walking.</p>

<p>&ldquo;You sore or something?&rdquo; he asks, as if he
didn&rsquo;t know.</p>

<p>I keep on walking.</p>

<p>&ldquo;O.K., be sore!&rdquo; he snaps. Then he breaks
into a falsetto: &ldquo;Goo&rsquo;bye, Bashful!&rdquo;</p>

<p>I let him have it before he&rsquo;s hardly got his
mouth closed. He hits me back in the stomach
and hooks one of his ankles around mine so we
both fall down. It goes from bad to worse. He
gets me by the hair and bangs my head on the
sidewalk, so I twist and bite his hand. We&rsquo;re
gouging and scratching and biting and kicking,
because we&rsquo;re both so mad we can hardly see,
and anyway no one ever taught us those Queensberry
rules. There&rsquo;s no point in going into all
the gory details. Finally two guys haul us apart.
I have hold of Nick&rsquo;s shirt and it rips. Good.
He&rsquo;s half crying, and he twists away from the
guy that grabbed him and screams some things
at me before darting across the avenue.</p>

<p>I&rsquo;m standing panting and sobbing, and the
guy holding me says, &ldquo;You oughta be ashamed.
Now go on home.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Aw, you and your big mouth,&rdquo; I say, still mad
<!--<pb n="042"/>--><anchor id="Pg042"/>
enough to feel reckless. He throws a fake punch,
but he&rsquo;s not really interested. He goes his way,
and I go mine.</p>

<p>I must look pretty bad because a lot of people
on the street shake their heads at me. I walk in
the door at home, expecting the worst, but fortunately
Mom is out. Pop just whistles through
his teeth.</p>

<p>&ldquo;That must have been quite a horror picture!&rdquo;
he says.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<!--<pb n="043"/>--><anchor id="Pg043"/>
  <index index="toc" level1="&nbsp;5. Around Manhattan" />
  <index index="pdf"/>
  <head rend='right'>5</head>
<figure rend="width: 100%" url="images/image05.png">
  <figDesc>Illustration: Dave and Tom lunching in meadow above river.</figDesc>
</figure>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then>
    <p><lb/></p>
    <p rend='right'>AROUND MANHATTAN</p>
    <p><lb/></p>
  </then>
</pgIf>

<p>By the next weekend I no longer look like a
fugitive from a riot. All week in school Nick and
I get asked whether we got hit by a swinging
door; then the fellows notice the two of us aren&rsquo;t
speaking to each other, and they sort of sheer
off the subject. Come Saturday, I sit on the stoop
and wonder, what now? There are plenty of
other kids in school I like, but they mostly live
over in the project&mdash;Stuyvesant Town, that is.
<!--<pb n="044"/>--><anchor id="Pg044"/>
I&rsquo;ve never bothered to hunt them up weekends
because Nick&rsquo;s so much nearer.</p>

<p>Summer is coming on, though, and I&rsquo;ve got to
have someone to hang around with. This is the
last Saturday before Memorial Day. Getting
time for beaches and stuff. I suppose Nick and
I might get together again, but not if he&rsquo;s going
to be nuts about girls all the time.</p>

<p>A guy stops in front of the stoop, and Cat half
opens his eyes in the sun and squints at him.
The guy says, &ldquo;You Dave Mitchell?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Huh? Yeah.&rdquo; I look up, surprised. I don&rsquo;t
exactly recognize the guy, never having seen him
in a clear light before. But from the voice I know
it&rsquo;s Tom.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Oh, hi!&rdquo; I say. &ldquo;Here&rsquo;s Cat. He&rsquo;s pretty handsome
in daylight.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Yeah, he looks all right, but what happened
to you?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Me and a friend of mine got in a fight.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;With some other guys or what?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Nah. We had a fight with each other.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Um, that&rsquo;s bad.&rdquo; Tom sits down and has
sense enough to see there isn&rsquo;t anymore to say
on that subject. &ldquo;I start work Memorial Day,
when the beaches open. Working in a filling
<!--<pb n="045"/>--><anchor id="Pg045"/>
station on the Belt Parkway in Brooklyn.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Gee, that&rsquo;s a long way off. You going to live
over there?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Yeah, they&rsquo;re going to get me a room in a Y
in Brooklyn.&rdquo; Tom stretches restlessly and goes
on: &ldquo;I suppose you get sick of school and all,
but it&rsquo;s rotten having nothing to do. I&rsquo;d be ready
to go nuts if I didn&rsquo;t get a job. I can&rsquo;t wait to
start.&rdquo;</p>

<p>I think of asking him doesn&rsquo;t he have a home
or something to go back to, but somehow I don&rsquo;t
like to.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Like today,&rdquo; Tom says. &ldquo;I&rsquo;d like to go somewhere.
Do something. Got any ideas?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Um. I was sort of trying to think up something
myself. Movies?&rdquo;</p>

<p>Tom shakes himself. &ldquo;No. I want to walk, or
run, or throw something.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;There&rsquo;s a big park&mdash;sort of a woods&mdash;up near
the Bronx. A kid told me about it. He said he
found an Indian arrowhead there, but I bet he
didn&rsquo;t. Inwood Park, it&rsquo;s called.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;How do you get there?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Subway, I guess.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Let&rsquo;s go!&rdquo; Tom stands up and wriggles his
shoulders like he&rsquo;s Superman ready to take off.
</p>

<!--<pb n="046"/>--><anchor id="Pg046"/>
<p>&ldquo;O.K. Wait a minute. I&rsquo;ll go tell Mom. Should
I get some sandwiches?&rdquo;</p>

<p>Tom looks surprised. &ldquo;Sure, fine, if she doesn&rsquo;t
mind.&rdquo;</p>

<p>I&rsquo;m not worried about getting Mom to make
sandwiches because she always likes to fix a little
food for me. The thing is, ever since my fight
with Nick, she&rsquo;s been clucking around me like
the mother hen. Maybe she figures I got in some
gang fight, so she keeps asking me where I&rsquo;m
going and who with. Also, I guess she noticed I
don&rsquo;t go to Nick&rsquo;s after school anymore. I come
right home. So she asks me do I feel all right.
You can&rsquo;t win. Right now, I can see she&rsquo;s going
to begin asking who is Tom and where did I
meet him. It occurs to me there&rsquo;s an easy way
to take care of this.</p>

<p>I turn around to Tom again. &ldquo;Say, how
about you come up and I&rsquo;ll introduce you to
Mom? Then she won&rsquo;t start asking me a lot of
questions.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;You mean I <hi rend='italic'>look</hi> respectable, at least?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Sure.&rdquo;</p>

<p>We go up to the apartment, and Mom asks if
we&rsquo;d like some cold drinks or something. I tell
her I ran into Tom when he helped me hunt for
<!--<pb n="047"/>--><anchor id="Pg047"/>
Cat around Gramercy Park, which is almost true,
and that he sometimes plays stickball with us,
which isn&rsquo;t really true but it could be. Mom gets
us some orangeade. She usually keeps something
like that in the icebox in summer, because she
thinks cokes are bad for you.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Do you live around here?&rdquo; she asks Tom.</p>

<p>&ldquo;No, ma&rsquo;am,&rdquo; says Tom firmly. &ldquo;I live at
the Y. I&rsquo;ve got a summer job in a filling station
over in Brooklyn, starting right after Memorial
Day.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;That&rsquo;s fine,&rdquo; Mom says. &ldquo;I wish Davey could
get a job. He gets so restless with nothing to do
in the summer.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Aw, Mom, forget it! You got to fill in about
six-hundred working papers if you&rsquo;re under
sixteen.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Listen, Mom, what I came up for&mdash;we
thought we&rsquo;d make some sandwiches and go up
to Inwood Park.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Inwood? Where&rsquo;s that?&rdquo; So I explain to her
about the Indian arrowheads, and we get out
the classified phone book and look at the subway
map, which shows there&rsquo;s an IND train that goes
right to it.</p>

<p>&ldquo;I get sort of restless myself, with nothing to
<!--<pb n="048"/>--><anchor id="Pg048"/>
do,&rdquo; says Tom. &ldquo;We just figured we&rsquo;d do a little
exploring around in the woods and get some
exercise.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Why, yes, that seems like a good idea.&rdquo; Mom
looks at him and nods. She seems to have decided
he&rsquo;s reliable, as well as respectable.</p>

<p>I see there&rsquo;s some leftover cold spaghetti in
the icebox, and I ask Mom to put it in sandwiches.
She thinks I&rsquo;m cracked, but I did this
once before, and it&rsquo;s good, &rsquo;specially if there&rsquo;s
plenty of meat and sauce on the spaghetti. We
take along a bag of cherries, too.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Thanks, Mom. Bye. I&rsquo;ll be back before
supper.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Take care,&rdquo; she says. &ldquo;No fights.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Don&rsquo;t worry. We&rsquo;ll stay out of fights,&rdquo; says
Tom quite seriously.</p>

<p>We go down the stairs, and Tom says, &ldquo;Your
mother is really nice.&rdquo;</p>

<p>I&rsquo;m sort of surprised&mdash;kids don&rsquo;t usually say
much about each other&rsquo;s parents. &ldquo;Yeah, Mom&rsquo;s
O.K. I guess she worries about me and Pop a
lot.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;It must be pretty nice to have your mother
at home,&rdquo; he says.
</p>

<!--<pb n="049"/>--><anchor id="Pg049"/>
<p>That kind of jolts me, too. I wonder where
his mother and father are, whether they&rsquo;re dead
or something; but again, I don&rsquo;t quite want to
ask. Tom isn&rsquo;t an easy guy to ask questions. He&rsquo;s
sort of like an island, by himself in the ocean.</p>

<p>We walk down to Fourteenth Street and over
to Eighth Avenue, about twelve blocks; after all,
exercise is what we want. The IND trains are
fast, and it only takes about half an hour to get
up to Inwood, at 206th Street. The park is right
close, and it is real woods, although there are
paved walks around through it. We push uphill
and get in a grassy meadow, where you can see
out over the Hudson River to the Palisades in
Jersey. It&rsquo;s good and hot, and we flop in the sun.
There aren&rsquo;t many other people around, which
is rare in New York.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Let&rsquo;s eat lunch,&rdquo; says Tom. &ldquo;Then we can
go hunting arrowheads and not have to carry it.&rdquo;</p>

<p>He agrees the spaghetti sandwich is a great
invention.</p>

<p>I wish the weather would stay like this more
of the year&mdash;good and sweaty hot in the middle
of the day, so you feel like going swimming, but
cool enough to sleep at night. We lie in the sun
<!--<pb n="050"/>--><anchor id="Pg050"/>
awhile after lunch and agree that it&rsquo;s too bad
there isn&rsquo;t an ocean within jumping-in distance.
But there isn&rsquo;t, and flies are biting the backs of
our necks, so we get up and start exploring.</p>

<p>We find a few places that you might conceivably
call caves, but they&rsquo;ve been well picked
over for arrowheads, if there ever were any.
That&rsquo;s the trouble in the city: anytime you have
an idea, you find out a million other people had
the same idea first. Along in mid-afternoon, we
drift down toward the subway and get cokes
and ice cream before we start back.</p>

<p>I don&rsquo;t really feel like going home yet, so I
think a minute and study the subway map inside
the car. &ldquo;Hey, as long as we&rsquo;re on the subway
anyway, we could go on down to Cortlandt
Street to the Army-Navy surplus store. I got to
get a knapsack before summer.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;O.K.&rdquo; Tom shrugs. He&rsquo;s staring out the
window and doesn&rsquo;t seem to care where he goes.</p>

<p>&ldquo;I got a great first-aid survival kit there. Disinfectant
and burn ointment and bug dope and
bandages, in a khaki metal box that&rsquo;s waterproof,
and it was only sixty-five cents.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Hmm. Just what I need for survival on the
<!--<pb n="051"/>--><anchor id="Pg051"/>
sidewalks of New York,&rdquo; says Tom. I guess he&rsquo;s
kidding, in a sour sort of way. If you haven&rsquo;t
got a family around, though, survival must take
more than a sixty-five-cent kit.</p>

<p>The store is a little way from the nearest subway
stop, and we walk along not saying much.
Tom looks alive when he gets into the store,
though, because it really is a great place. They&rsquo;ve
got arctic explorers&rsquo; suits and old hand grenades
and shells and all kinds of rifles, as well as some
really cheap, useful clothing. They don&rsquo;t mind
how long you mosey around. In the end I buy
a belt pack and canteen, and Tom picks up some
skivvy shirts and socks that are only ten cents
each. They&rsquo;re secondhand, I guess, but they look
all right.</p>

<p>We walk over to the East Side subway, which
is only a few blocks away down here because the
island gets so narrow. Tom says he&rsquo;s never seen
Wall Street, where all the tycoons grind their
money machines. The place is practically deserted
now, being late Saturday afternoon, and
it&rsquo;s like walking through an empty cathedral.
You can make echoes.</p>

<p>We take the subway, and Tom walks along
<!--<pb n="052"/>--><anchor id="Pg052"/>
home with me. It seems too bad the day&rsquo;s over.
It was a pretty good day, after all.</p>

<p>&ldquo;So long, kid,&rdquo; Tom says. &ldquo;I&rsquo;ll send you a card
from Beautiful Brooklyn!&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;So long.&rdquo; I wave, and he starts off. I wish he
didn&rsquo;t have to go live in Brooklyn.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<!--<pb n="053"/>--><anchor id="Pg053"/>
  <index index="toc" level1="&nbsp;6. And Brooklyn" />
  <index index="pdf"/>
  <head rend='right'>6</head>
<figure rend="width: 100%" url="images/image06.png">
  <figDesc>Illustration: Dave wheeling his bike across Belt Parkway.</figDesc>
</figure>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then>
    <p><lb/></p>
    <p rend='right'>AND BROOKLYN</p>
    <p><lb/></p>
  </then>
</pgIf>

<p>You can&rsquo;t really stay sore at a guy you&rsquo;ve known
all your life, especially if he lives right around
the corner and goes to the same school. Anyhow,
one hot Saturday morning Nick turns up
at my house as if nothing had ever happened
and says do I want to go swimming, because the
Twenty-third Street pool&rsquo;s open weekends now.</p>

<p>After that we go back to playing ball on the
street in the evenings and swimming sometimes
<!--<pb n="054"/>--><anchor id="Pg054"/>
on weekends. One Saturday his mother tells me
he went to Coney Island. He didn&rsquo;t ask me to go
along, which is just as well, because I wouldn&rsquo;t
have. I don&rsquo;t hang around his house after school
much anymore, either. School lets out, and
there&rsquo;s the Fourth of July weekend, when we
go up to Connecticut, and pretty soon after that
Nick goes off to a camp his church runs. Pop
asks me if I want to go to a camp a few weeks,
but I don&rsquo;t. Life is pretty slow at home, but I
don&rsquo;t feel like all that organization.</p>

<p>I think Tom must have forgotten about me
and found a gang his own age when I get a
postcard from him: &ldquo;Dear Dave, The guy I work
for is a creep, and all the guys who buy gas
from him are creeps, so it&rsquo;s great to be alive in
Beautiful Brooklyn! Wish you were here, but
you&rsquo;re lucky you&rsquo;re not. Best, Tom.&rdquo;</p>

<p>It&rsquo;s hard to figure what he means when he
says a thing. However, I got nothing to do, so
I might as well go see. He said he was going to
work in a filling station on the Belt Parkway,
and there can&rsquo;t be a million of them.</p>

<p>I don&rsquo;t say anything too exact to Mom about
where I&rsquo;m going, because she gets worried about
me going too far, and besides I don&rsquo;t really know
where I&rsquo;m going.
</p>

<!--<pb n="055"/>--><anchor id="Pg055"/>
<p>Brooklyn, what a layout. It&rsquo;s not like Manhattan,
which runs pretty regularly north and
south, with decent square blocks. You could lose
a million friends in Brooklyn, with the streets
all running in circles and angles, and the people
all giving you cockeyed directions. What with
no bikes allowed on parkways, and skirting
around crumby looking neighborhoods, it takes
me at least a week of expeditions to find the
right part of the Belt Parkway to start checking
the filling stations.</p>

<p>I wheel my bike across the parkway, but even
so some cop yells at me. You&rsquo;d think a cop could
find a crime to get busy with.</p>

<p>On a real sticky day in July I wheel across
to a station at Thirty-fourth Street, and nobody
yells at me, and I go over to the air pump and
fiddle with my tires. A car pulls out after it gets
gas, and there&rsquo;s Tom.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Hi!&rdquo; I say.</p>

<p>Tom half frowns and quick looks over his
shoulder to see if his boss is around, I guess,
and then comes over to the air pump.</p>

<p>&ldquo;How&rsquo;d you get way out here?&rdquo; he says.</p>

<p>&ldquo;On the bike. I got your postcard, and I
figured I could find the filling station.&rdquo;</p>

<p>He relaxes and grins. I feel better. He says,
<!--<pb n="056"/>--><anchor id="Pg056"/>
&ldquo;You&rsquo;re a crazy kid. How&rsquo;s Cat?&rdquo;</p>

<p>But just then the boss has to come steaming
up. &ldquo;What d&rsquo;ya want, kid? No bikes allowed on
the parkway.&rdquo;</p>

<p>I start to say I&rsquo;m just getting air, but Tom
speaks up. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s all right. I know him.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Yeah? I told you, keep kids out of here!&rdquo; The
guy manages to suggest that kids Tom knows
are probably worse than any other kind. He
motions me off like a stray dog. I don&rsquo;t want to
get Tom in any trouble, so I get going. At the
edge of the parkway I wave. &ldquo;So long. Write me
another postcard.&rdquo;</p>

<p>Tom raises a hand briefly, but his face looks
closed, like nothing was going to get in or out.</p>

<p>I pedal slowly and hotly back through the
tangle of Brooklyn and figure, well, that&rsquo;s a
week&rsquo;s research wasted. I still don&rsquo;t know where
Tom lives, so I don&rsquo;t know how I can get a hold
of him again. Anyway, how do I know he wants
to be bothered with me? He looked pretty fed
up with everything.</p>

<p>So long as I got nothing else to do, the next
week I figure I&rsquo;ll get public-spirited at home: I
paint the kitchen for Mom, which isn&rsquo;t so bad,
but moving all those silly dishes and pots and
<!--<pb n="057"/>--><anchor id="Pg057"/>
scrumy little spice cans can drive you wild. I
only break one good vase and a bottle of salad
oil. Salad oil and broken glass are great. In the
afternoons I go to the swimming pool and learn
to do a jackknife and a backflip, so Pop will think
I am growing up to be a Real American Boy.
Also, you practically have to learn to dive so you
can use the diving pool, because the swimming
pool is so jam-packed with screaming sardines
you can&rsquo;t move in it.</p>

<p>Evenings Cat and I play records, or we go to
see Aunt Kate and drink iced tea. One weekend
my real aunt comes to visit and sleeps in my
room, so I go to stay with Aunt Kate, and I pretty
near turn into cottage cheese.</p>

<p>I&rsquo;ve about settled into this dull routine when
Mom surprises me by handing me a postcard
one morning. It&rsquo;s from Tom: &ldquo;Day off next
Tuesday. If you feel like it, meet me near the
aquarium at Coney Island about nine in the
morning, before it&rsquo;s crowded.&rdquo;</p>

<p>So that week drags by till Tuesday, and there
I am at Coney Island bright and early. Tom is
easy enough to find, pacing up and down the
boardwalk like a tiger. We say &ldquo;Hi&rdquo; and so forth,
and I&rsquo;m all ready to take a run for the water,
<!--<pb n="058"/>--><anchor id="Pg058"/>
but he keeps snapping his fingers and looking
up and down the boardwalk.</p>

<p>Finally he says, &ldquo;There&rsquo;s a girl I used to know
pretty well. I didn&rsquo;t see her for a while till last
week, and we got in an argument, and I guess
she&rsquo;s mad. I wrote and asked her to come swimming
today, but maybe she&rsquo;s not coming.&rdquo;</p>

<p>I figure it out that I&rsquo;m there as insurance
against the girl not showing up, but I don&rsquo;t
mind. Anyhow, she does show up. It can&rsquo;t have
been too much of an argument they had, because
she acts pretty friendly.</p>

<p>Tom introduces us. Her name is Hilda and a
last name that&rsquo;d be hard to spell&mdash;Swedish maybe&mdash;and
she&rsquo;s got a wide, laughing kind of mouth
and a big coil of yellow hair in a bun on top of
her head, and a mighty good figure. She asks me
where I ran into Tom, and we tell her all about
Cat and the cellar at Number Forty-six, and I
tell them both about my Ivy-League haircut,
which I had never explained to anyone before.
They get a laugh out of that, and then she asks
him about the filling-station job, and he says it
stinks.</p>

<p>I figure they could get along without me for
a while, so I go for a swim and wander down
<!--<pb n="059"/>--><anchor id="Pg059"/>
the beach a ways and eat a hot dog and swim
some more. When I come back, I see Tom and
Hilda just coming out of the water, so I join
them. Hilda says, &ldquo;Come have a coke. Tom says
he&rsquo;s got to try swimming to France just once
more.&rdquo;</p>

<p>I don&rsquo;t know just what she means, but we go
get cokes and come back and stretch out in the
sun. She asks me do I want a smoke, and I say
No. It&rsquo;s nice to be asked, though. We watch
Tom, who is swimming out past all the other
people. I wish I&rsquo;d gone with him. I say, &ldquo;Lifeguard&rsquo;s
going to whistle him in pretty soon. He&rsquo;s
out past all the others.&rdquo;</p>

<p>Hilda lets out a breath and snorts, &ldquo;He&rsquo;ll always
go till they blow the whistle. Always got
to go farther than anyone else.&rdquo;</p>

<p>I don&rsquo;t know what to say to that, so I don&rsquo;t say
anything.</p>

<p>Hilda goes on: &ldquo;I used to wait tables in a
restaurant down near Washington Square. Tom
and a lot of the boys from NYU came in there.
Sometimes the day before an exam he&rsquo;d be
sitting around for hours, buying people cokes
and acting as if he hadn&rsquo;t a care in the world.
Some other times, for no reason anyone could
<!--<pb n="060"/>--><anchor id="Pg060"/>
tell, he&rsquo;d sit in a corner and stir his coffee like
he was going to make a hole in the cup.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Tom was at NYU?&rdquo; I ask. I don&rsquo;t know
where I thought he&rsquo;d been before he turned up
in the cellar. I guess I never thought.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Sure,&rdquo; Hilda says. &ldquo;He was in the Washington
Square College for about a year and a half.
He lived in a dormitory uptown, but I used to
see him in the restaurant, and then fairly often
we had dates after I got off work. He has people
out in the Midwest somewhere&mdash;a father and
a stepmother. He was always sour and close-mouthed
about them, even before he got thrown
out of NYU. Now he won&rsquo;t even write them.&rdquo;</p>

<p>This is a lot of information to take in all at
once and leaves a lot of questions unanswered.
The first one that comes into my head is this:
&ldquo;How come he got thrown out of NYU?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Well, it makes Tom so sore, he&rsquo;s never
really told me a plain, straight story. It&rsquo;s all
mixed up with his father. I think his father wrote
him not to come home at Christmas vacation,
for some reason. Tom and a couple of other boys
who were left in the dormitory over the holidays
got horsing around and had a water fight. The
college got huffy and wrote the parents, telling
<!--<pb n="061"/>--><anchor id="Pg061"/>
them to pay up for damages. The other parents
were pretty angry, but they stuck behind their
kids and paid up. Tom just never heard from
his father. Not a line.</p>

<p>&ldquo;That was when Tom began coming into the
restaurant looking like thunder. The college began
needling him for the water-fight damages, as
well as second-semester tuition. He took his first
exam, physics, and got an A on it. He&rsquo;s pretty
smart.</p>

<p>&ldquo;He still didn&rsquo;t hear anything from home.
He took the second exam, French, and thought
he flunked it. That same afternoon he went into
the office and told the dean he was quitting,
and he packed his stuff and left. I didn&rsquo;t see him
again till a week ago. I didn&rsquo;t know if he&rsquo;d got
sick of me, or left town, or what.</p>

<p>&ldquo;He says he wrote his father that he had a
good job, and they could forget about him.
Then he broke into that cellar on a dare or for
kicks.</p>

<p>&ldquo;So here we are. What do we do next?&rdquo;</p>

<p>Hilda looks at me&mdash;me, age fourteen&mdash;as if I
might actually know, and it&rsquo;s kind of unnerving.
Everyone I know, their life goes along in set
periods: grade school, junior high, high school,
<!--<pb n="062"/>--><anchor id="Pg062"/>
college, and maybe getting married. They don&rsquo;t
really have to think what comes next.</p>

<p>I say cautiously, &ldquo;My pop says a kid&rsquo;s got to go
to college now to get anywhere. Maybe he ought
to go back to school.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;You&rsquo;re so right, Grandpa,&rdquo; she says, and I
would have felt silly, but she has a nice friendly
laugh. &ldquo;I wish I could persuade him to go back.
But it&rsquo;s not so easy. I guess he&rsquo;s got to get a job
and go to night school, if they&rsquo;ll accept him. He
won&rsquo;t ask his father for money.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;You two got my life figured out?&rdquo; Tom has
come up behind us while we were lying in the
sand on our stomachs. &ldquo;I just hope that sour
grape at the filling station gives me a good recommendation
so I can get another job. The way he
watches his cash register, you&rsquo;d think I was Al
Capone.&rdquo;</p>

<p>We talk a bit, and then Hilda gets up and says
she&rsquo;s going to the ladies&rsquo; room. She doesn&rsquo;t act
coy about it, the way most girls do when they&rsquo;re
sitting with guys. She just leaves.</p>

<p>&ldquo;How do you like Hilda?&rdquo; Tom asks, and
again I&rsquo;m sort of surprised, because he acts like
he really wants my opinion.</p>

<p>&ldquo;She&rsquo;s nice,&rdquo; I say.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Yeah.&rdquo; Tom suddenly glowers, as if I&rsquo;d said
<!--<pb n="063"/>--><anchor id="Pg063"/>
I <hi rend='italic'>didn&rsquo;t</hi> like her. &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t know why she wastes
her time on me. I&rsquo;ll never be any use to her.
When her family hears about me, I&rsquo;ll get the
boot.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;I could ask my pop. You know, I told you
he&rsquo;s a lawyer. Maybe he&rsquo;d know how you go
about getting back into college or getting a job
or something.&rdquo;</p>

<p>Tom laughs, an unamused bark. &ldquo;Maybe he&rsquo;ll
tell you to quit hanging around with jerks that
get in trouble with the cops.&rdquo;</p>

<p>This is a point, all right. Come to think, I
don&rsquo;t know why I said I&rsquo;d ask Pop anyway. I
usually make a point of not letting his nose into
my personal affairs, because I figure he&rsquo;ll just
start bossing me around. However, I certainly
can&rsquo;t do anything for Tom on my own.</p>

<p>I say, &ldquo;I&rsquo;ll chance it. The worst he ever does
is talk. One time he made a federal case out of
me buying a Belafonte record he didn&rsquo;t like.
Another time playing ball I cracked a window in
a guy&rsquo;s Cadillac, and Pop acted like he was going
to sue the guy for owning a Cadillac. You just
never know.&rdquo;</p>

<p>Tom says, &ldquo;With my dad, you <hi rend='italic'>know</hi>: I&rsquo;m
wrong.&rdquo;</p>

<p>Hilda comes back just then. She snaps, &ldquo;If he&rsquo;s
<!--<pb n="064"/>--><anchor id="Pg064"/>
such a drug on the market, why don&rsquo;t you shut
up and forget about him?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;O.K., O.K.,&rdquo; says Tom.</p>

<p>The beach is getting filled up by now, so we
pull on our clothes and head for the subway.
Tom and Hilda get off in Brooklyn, and I go
on to Union Square.</p>

<p>After dinner that night Mom is washing the
dishes and Pop is reading the paper, and I figure
I might as well dive in.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Pop,&rdquo; I say, &ldquo;there&rsquo;s this guy I met at the
beach. Well, really I mean I met him this spring
when I was hunting for Cat, and this guy was
in the cellar at Forty-six Gramercy, and he got
caught and....&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Wha-a-a-t?&rdquo; Pop puts down his paper and
takes off his glasses. &ldquo;Begin again.&rdquo;</p>

<p>So I give it to him again, slow, and with
explanations. I go through the whole business
about the filling station and Hilda and NYU,
and I&rsquo;ll say one thing for Pop, when he finally
settles down to listen, he listens. I get through,
and he puts on his reading glasses and goes to
look out the window.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Do you have this young man&rsquo;s name and
address, or is he just Tom from The Cellar?&rdquo;
</p>

<!--<pb n="065"/>--><anchor id="Pg065"/>
<p>I&rsquo;d just got it from Tom when we were at the
beach. He&rsquo;s at a Y in Brooklyn, so I tell Pop this.</p>

<p>Pop says, &ldquo;Tell him to call my office and come
in to see me on his next day off. Meanwhile,
I&rsquo;ll bone up on City educational policies in regard
to juvenile delinquents.&rdquo;</p>

<p>He says this perfectly straight, as if there&rsquo;d be
a book on the subject. Then he goes back to
his newspaper, so I guess that closes the subject
for now.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Thanks, Pop,&rdquo; I say and start to go out.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Entirely welcome,&rdquo; says Pop. As I get to the
door, he adds, &ldquo;If that cat of yours makes a
practice of introducing you to the underworld
in other people&rsquo;s cellars, we can do without him.
We probably can anyway.&rdquo;</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<!--<pb n="066"/>--><anchor id="Pg066"/>
  <index index="toc" level1="&nbsp;7. Survival" />
  <index index="pdf"/>
  <head rend='right'>7</head>
<figure rend="width: 100%" url="images/image07.png">
  <figDesc>Illustration: Dave talking with veterinarian while holding Cat.</figDesc>
</figure>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then>
    <p><lb/></p>
    <p rend='right'>SURVIVAL</p>
    <p><lb/></p>
  </then>
</pgIf>

<p>Cat hadn&rsquo;t got me into anymore cellars, but I
can&rsquo;t honestly say he&rsquo;d been sitting home tending
his knitting&mdash;not him.</p>

<p>One hot morning I went to pick up the milk
outside our door, and Cat was sleeping there on
the mat. He didn&rsquo;t even look up at me. After I
scratched his ears and talked to him some, he
got up and hobbled into the house.</p>

<p>I put him up on my bed, under the light, for
<!--<pb n="067"/>--><anchor id="Pg067"/>
inspection. One front claw was torn off, which
is why he was limping, his left ear was ripped,
and there was quite a bit of fur missing here and
there. He curled up on my bed and didn&rsquo;t move
all day.</p>

<p>I came and looked at him every few hours and
wondered if I ought to take him to a vet. But
he seemed to be breathing all right, so I went
away and thought about it some more. Come
night, I pushed him gently to one side, wondering
what I better do in the morning.</p>

<p>Well, in the morning Cat wakes up, stretches,
yawns, and drops easily down off the bed and
walks away. He still limps a little, but otherwise
he acts like nothing had happened. He just
wants to know what&rsquo;s for breakfast.</p>

<p>&ldquo;You better watch out. One day you&rsquo;ll run
into a cat that&rsquo;s bigger and meaner than you,&rdquo;
I tell him.</p>

<p>Cat continues to wait for breakfast. He is not
impressed.</p>

<p>But I&rsquo;m worried. Suppose some big old cat
chews him up and he&rsquo;s hurt too bad to get home?
After breakfast I take him out in the backyard
for a bit, and then I shut him in my room and
go over to consult Aunt Kate.
</p>

<!--<pb n="068"/>--><anchor id="Pg068"/>
<p>She sets me up with the usual iced tea and
dish of cottage cheese.</p>

<p>&ldquo;I had breakfast already. What do I need with
cottage cheese?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Eat it. It&rsquo;s good for you.&rdquo;</p>

<p>So I eat it, and then I start telling her about
Cat. &ldquo;He came home all chewed up night before
last. I&rsquo;m afraid some night he&rsquo;s not going
to make it.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Right,&rdquo; says Kate. She&rsquo;s not very talky, but
I&rsquo;m sort of surprised. I expected she&rsquo;d tell me
to quit worrying, Cat can take care of himself.
She starts pulling Susan&rsquo;s latest kittens out from
under the sofa and sorting them out as if they
were ribbons: one gray, two tiger, one yellow,
one calico.</p>

<p>&ldquo;So what you going to do?&rdquo; she shoots at me,
shoveling the kittens back to Susan.</p>

<p>&ldquo;I&mdash;uh&mdash;I dunno. I thought maybe I ought to
try to keep him in nights.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Huh. Don&rsquo;t know much, do you?&rdquo; she says.
&ldquo;Well, so I&rsquo;ll tell you. Your Cat has probably
fathered a few dozen kittens by now, and once
a cat&rsquo;s been out and mated, you can&rsquo;t keep him
in. You got to get him altered. Then he won&rsquo;t
want to go out so much.&rdquo;
</p>

<!--<pb n="069"/>--><anchor id="Pg069"/>
<p>&ldquo;Altered?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Fixed. Castrated is the technical word. It&rsquo;s
a two-minute operation. Cost you three dollars.
Take him to Speyer Hospital&mdash;big new building
up on First Avenue.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;You mean get him fixed so he&rsquo;s not a real
tomcat any more? The heck with that! I don&rsquo;t
want him turned into a fat old cushion cat!&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;He won&rsquo;t be,&rdquo; she says. &ldquo;But if it makes you
happier, let him get killed in a cat fight. He&rsquo;s
tough. He&rsquo;ll last a year or two. Suit yourself.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Ah, you&rsquo;re screwy! You and your cottage
cheese!&rdquo; Even as I say it I feel a little guilty.
But I feel mad and mixed up, and I fling out
the door. It&rsquo;s the first time I ever left Kate&rsquo;s mad.
Usually I leave <hi rend='italic'>our</hi>&nbsp; house mad and go to Kate.</p>

<p>Now I got nowhere to go. I walk along, cussing
and fuming and kicking pebbles. I come to
an air-conditioned movie and go up to the
window.</p>

<p>The phony blonde in the booth looks at me
and sneers, &ldquo;You&rsquo;re not sixteen. We don&rsquo;t have
a children&rsquo;s section in this theater.&rdquo; She doesn&rsquo;t
even ask. She just says it. It&rsquo;s a great world. I go
home. There&rsquo;s no one there but Cat, so I turn
the record player up full blast.
</p>

<!--<pb n="070"/>--><anchor id="Pg070"/>
<p>Pop comes home in one of his unexpected
fits of generosity that night and takes us to the
movies. Cat behaves himself and stays around
home and our cellar for a while, so I stop worrying.
But it doesn&rsquo;t last long.</p>

<p>As soon as his claw heals, he starts sashaying
off again. One night I hear cats yowling out back
and I go out with a bucket of water and douse
them and bring Cat in. There&rsquo;s a pretty little
tiger cat, hardly more than a kitten, sitting on
the fence licking herself, dry and unconcerned.
Cat doesn&rsquo;t speak to me for a couple of days.</p>

<p>One morning Butch, the janitor, comes up
and knocks on our door. &ldquo;You better come down
and look at your cat. He got himself mighty
chewed up. Most near dead.&rdquo;</p>

<p>I hurry down, and there is Cat sprawled in a
corner on the cool cement floor. His mouth is
half open, and his breath comes in wheezes, like
he has asthma. I don&rsquo;t know whether to pick him
up or not.</p>

<p>Butch says, &ldquo;Best let him lie.&rdquo;</p>

<p>I sit down beside him. After a bit his breath
comes easier and he puts his head down. Then
I see he&rsquo;s got a long, deep claw gouge going from
his shoulder down one leg. It&rsquo;s half an inch
<!--<pb n="071"/>--><anchor id="Pg071"/>
open, and anyone can see it won&rsquo;t heal by itself.</p>

<p>Butch shakes his head. &ldquo;You gotta take him
to the veteran, sure. That&rsquo;s the cat doctor.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Yeah,&rdquo; I say, not correcting him. It&rsquo;s not just
the gash that&rsquo;s worrying me. I remember what
Aunt Kate said, and it gives me a cold feeling in
the stomach: In the back-alley jungle he&rsquo;d last
a year, maybe two.</p>

<p>Looking at Cat, right now, I know she&rsquo;s right.
But Cat&rsquo;s such a&mdash;well, such a <hi rend='italic'>cat</hi>. How can I
take him to be whittled down?</p>

<p>I tell Butch I&rsquo;ll be back down in a few
minutes, and I go upstairs. Mom&rsquo;s humming and
cleaning in the kitchen. I wander around and
stare out the window awhile. Finally I go in the
kitchen and stare into the icebox, and then I tell
Mom about the gash in Cat&rsquo;s leg.</p>

<p>She asks if I know a vet to take him to.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Yeah, there&rsquo;s Speyer. It&rsquo;s a big, new hospital&mdash;good
enough for people, even&mdash;with a view of
the East River. The thing is, Mom, Cat keeps
going off and fighting and getting hurt, and
people tell me I ought to get him altered.&rdquo;</p>

<p>Mom wets the sponge and squeezes it out and
polishes at the sink, and I wonder if she knows
what I&rsquo;m talking about because I don&rsquo;t really
<!--<pb n="072"/>--><anchor id="Pg072"/>
know how to explain it any better.</p>

<p>She wrings the sponge out, finally, and sits
down at the kitchen table.</p>

<p>She says, &ldquo;Cat&rsquo;s not a free wild animal now,
and he wouldn&rsquo;t be even if you turned him
loose. He belongs to <hi rend='italic'>you</hi>, so you have to do whatever
is best for <hi rend='italic'>him</hi>, whether it&rsquo;s what you&rsquo;d like
or not. Ask the doctor and do what he says.&rdquo;</p>

<p>Mom puts it on the line, all right. It doesn&rsquo;t
make me feel any better about Cat. She takes
five dollars out of her pocketbook and gives it
to me.</p>

<p>I get out the wicker hamper and go down to
the cellar and load Cat in. He meows, a low
resentful rumble, but he doesn&rsquo;t try to get away.</p>

<p>Cat in the hamper is no powder puff, and
I get pretty hot walking to the bus, and then
from the bus stop to the animal hospital. I get
there and wait, and dogs sniff at me, and I fill
in forms. The lady asks me if I can afford to
pay, and with Mom&rsquo;s five bucks and four of my
own, I say Yes.</p>

<p>The doctor is a youngish guy, but bald, in a
white shirt like a dentist&rsquo;s. I put Cat on the table
in front of him. He says, &ldquo;So why don&rsquo;t you stay
out of fights, like your mommy told you?&rdquo;
</p>

<!--<pb n="073"/>--><anchor id="Pg073"/>
<p>I relax a bit and smile, and he says, &ldquo;That&rsquo;s
better. Don&rsquo;t worry. We&rsquo;ll take care of tomcat.
I suppose he got this gash in a fight?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Yeah.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;He been altered?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;No.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;How old is he?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;I don&rsquo;t know. He was a stray. I&rsquo;ve had him
almost a year.&rdquo;</p>

<p>All the time he&rsquo;s talking, the doctor is soothing
Cat and looking him over. He goes on
stroking him and looks up at me. &ldquo;Well, son,
one of these days he&rsquo;s going to get in one fight
too many. Shall we alter him the same time we
sew up his leg?&rdquo;</p>

<p>So there it is. I can&rsquo;t seem to answer right
away. If the doctor had argued with me, I might
have said No. But he just goes on humming and
stroking. Finally he says, &ldquo;It&rsquo;s tough, I know.
Maybe he&rsquo;s got a right to be a tiger. But you
can&rsquo;t keep a tiger for a pet.&rdquo;</p>

<p>I say, &ldquo;O.K.&rdquo;</p>

<p>An attendant takes Cat away, and I go sit in
the waiting room, feeling sweaty and cold all
over. They tell me it&rsquo;ll be a couple of hours, so
I go out and wander around a lot of blocks I
<!--<pb n="074"/>--><anchor id="Pg074"/>
never saw before and drink some cokes and
sit and look up at the Fifty-ninth Street Bridge
to Queens.</p>

<p>When I go back for him, Cat looks the same
as ever, except for a bandage all up his right
front leg. The doctor tells me to come back
Friday and he&rsquo;ll take out the stitches.</p>

<p>Mom sees me come in the door, and I guess
I look pretty grim, because she says, &ldquo;Cat will
be all right, won&rsquo;t he, dear?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Yes.&rdquo; I go past her and down into my room
and let Cat out of the basket and then bury my
head under the pillow. I&rsquo;m not exactly ashamed
of crying, but I don&rsquo;t want Mom to hear.</p>

<p>After a while I pull my head out. Cat is lying
there beside me, his eyes half open, the tip end
of his tail twitching very slowly. I rub my eyes
on the back of his neck and whisper to him,
&ldquo;I&rsquo;m sorry. Be tough, Cat, anyway, will you?&rdquo;</p>

<p>Cat stretches and hops off the bed on his three
good legs.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<!--<pb n="075"/>--><anchor id="Pg075"/>
  <index index="toc" level1="&nbsp;8. West Side Story" />
  <index index="pdf"/>
  <head rend='right'>8</head>
<figure rend="width: 100%" url="images/image08.png">
  <figDesc>Illustration: Dave and Mary buying tickets to West Side Story.</figDesc>
</figure>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then>
    <p><lb/></p>
    <p rend='right'>WEST SIDE STORY</p>
    <p><lb/></p>
  </then>
</pgIf>

<p>The regular park man got sunstroke or something,
so I earned fourteen dollars raking and
mowing in Gramercy Park in the middle of August.
Gramercy Park is a private park. You have
to own a key to get in, so the city doesn&rsquo;t take
care of it.</p>

<p>Real paper money, at this time of year especially,
is very cheering. I head up to Sam Goody&rsquo;s
to see what records he&rsquo;s got on sale and what
<!--<pb n="076"/>--><anchor id="Pg076"/>
characters are buying them. Maybe I&rsquo;ll buy
something, maybe not, but as long as I&rsquo;ve got
money in my pocket, I don&rsquo;t feel like the guy
is glaring at me for taking up floor space.</p>

<p>Along the way I walk through the library,
the big one at Forty-second Street. You go in by
the lions on Fifth Avenue, and there&rsquo;s all kinds
of pictures and books on exhibit in the halls,
and you walk through to the back, where you
can take out books. It&rsquo;s nice and cool, and nobody
glares at you unless you either make a lot
of noise or go to sleep. I can take books out of
here and return them at the Twenty-third Street
branch, which is handy.</p>

<p>Sam Goody&rsquo;s is air-conditioned, so it&rsquo;s cool too.
There are always several things playing on different
machines you can listen to. Almost the
most fun is watching the people: little, fat, bald
guys buying long-haired classical music, and
thin, shaggy beatniks listening to the jazz.</p>

<p>I go to check if there are any bargains in the
Kingston or Belafonte division. There&rsquo;s a girl
standing there reading the backs of records, but
I don&rsquo;t really catch a look at more than her shoes&mdash;little
red flats they are. After a bit she reaches
for a record over my head and says, &ldquo;Excuse me.&rdquo;
</p>

<!--<pb n="077"/>--><anchor id="Pg077"/>
<p>&ldquo;Sure.&rdquo; Then we catch each other&rsquo;s eye and
both say, &ldquo;Oh. Gee, hello.&rdquo;</p>

<p>Well, we&rsquo;re both pretty surprised, because this
is the girl I met out at Coney Island that day with
Nick when I had Cat with me, and now we&rsquo;re
both a long way from Coney Island. This girl
isn&rsquo;t one of the two giggly ones. It&rsquo;s the third,
the one that liked Cat.</p>

<p>We&rsquo;ve both forgotten each other&rsquo;s names, so
we begin over with that. I ask her what she&rsquo;s been
doing, and she&rsquo;s been at Girl Scout camp a few
weeks, and then she earned some money baby-sitting.
So she came to think about records, like
me. I tell her I&rsquo;ve been at Coney once this summer,
and I looked around for her, which is true,
because I did.</p>

<p>&ldquo;It&rsquo;s a big place,&rdquo; she says, smiling.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Say, you live out there, don&rsquo;t you? How come
you get all the way in here by yourself? Doesn&rsquo;t
your mom get in a flap? Mine would, if she knew
I was going to Coney alone.&rdquo;</p>

<p>Mary says, &ldquo;I came in with Mom. Some friend
of hers has a small art exhibition opening. She
said I could go home alone. After all, she knows
I&rsquo;m not going to get lost.&rdquo;</p>

<p>I say, &ldquo;Gee, it&rsquo;d be great to have a mother
<!--<pb n="078"/>--><anchor id="Pg078"/>
that didn&rsquo;t worry about you all the time.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Oh, Mom worries.&rdquo; Mary giggles. &ldquo;You
should have heard her when I said I liked <hi rend='italic'>Gone
With the Wind</hi>&nbsp; and I didn&rsquo;t like <hi rend='italic'>Anna Karenina</hi>.
I pretty nearly got disowned.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;What does she think about science fiction?&rdquo;
I ask, and Mary makes a face, and we both laugh.</p>

<p>I go on. &ldquo;Well, my mom doesn&rsquo;t care what I
read. She worries about what I eat and whether
my feet are wet, and she always seems to think
I&rsquo;m about to kill myself. It&rsquo;s a nuisance, really.&rdquo;</p>

<p>Mary looks solemn all of a sudden. She says
slowly, &ldquo;I think maybe it&rsquo;d be nice. I mean to
have someone worrying about whether you&rsquo;re
comfortable and all. Instead of just picking your
brains all the time.&rdquo;</p>

<p>This seems to exhaust the subject of our respective
mothers, and Mary picks up the record
of <hi rend='italic'>West Side Story</hi> and says, &ldquo;Gee, I&rsquo;d like to
see that. Did you?&rdquo;</p>

<p>I say No, and to tell the truth I hadn&rsquo;t hardly
heard of it.</p>

<p>&ldquo;I read a book about him. It was wonderful,&rdquo;
she says.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Who?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Bernstein. The man who wrote it.&rdquo;
</p>

<!--<pb n="079"/>--><anchor id="Pg079"/>
<p>&ldquo;What&rsquo;s <hi rend='italic'>West Side Story</hi> about, him?&rdquo; I ask
cautiously.</p>

<p>&ldquo;No, no&mdash;he wrote the music. It&rsquo;s about some
kids in two gangs, and there&rsquo;s a lot of dancing,
and then there&rsquo;s a fight and this kid gets&mdash;well,
it isn&rsquo;t a thing you can tell the story of very well.
You have to see it.&rdquo;</p>

<p>This gives me a very simple idea.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Why don&rsquo;t we?&rdquo; I say.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Huh?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Go see it. Why not? We got money.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;So we do,&rdquo; she says slowly. &ldquo;You think they&rsquo;ll
let us in, I mean being under sixteen?&rdquo;</p>

<p>You know, this is the first girl I really ever
talked to that talks like a person, not trying to
be cute or something.</p>

<p>We walk around to the theater, and being it&rsquo;s
Wednesday, there&rsquo;s a matinee about to start. The
man doesn&rsquo;t seem to be one bit worried about
taking our money. No wonder. It&rsquo;s two dollars
and ninety cents each. So we&rsquo;re inside with our
tickets before we&rsquo;ve hardly stopped to think.</p>

<p>Suddenly Mary says, &ldquo;Oops! I better call
Mom! Let&rsquo;s find out what time the show is over.&rdquo;</p>

<p>We do, and Mary phones. She says to me, &ldquo;I
just told her I was walking past <hi rend='italic'>West Side Story</hi>
<!--<pb n="080"/>--><anchor id="Pg080"/>
and found I could get a ticket. I didn&rsquo;t say anything
about you.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Why, would she mind?&rdquo;</p>

<p>Mary squints and looks puzzled. &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t
know. I just really don&rsquo;t know. It never happened
before.&rdquo;</p>

<p>We go in to the show, and she is right, it&rsquo;s
terrific. I hardly ever went to a live show before,
except a couple of children&rsquo;s things and something
by Shakespeare Pop took me to that was
very confusing. But this <hi rend='italic'>West Side Story</hi> is clear
as a bell.</p>

<p>We have an orangeade during intermission,
and I make the big gesture and pay for both of
them. Mary says, &ldquo;Isn&rsquo;t it wonderful! I just
happened to meet you at the beach, and then I
meet you at Goody&rsquo;s, and we get to see this show
that I&rsquo;ve wanted to go to for ages. None of my
friends at school want to spend this much money
on a show.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;It&rsquo;s wonderful,&rdquo; I say. &ldquo;After it&rsquo;s over, I&rsquo;m
going back to buy the record.&rdquo;</p>

<p>So after the show we buy it, and then we walk
along together to the subway. I&rsquo;ll have to get
off at the first stop, Fourteenth Street, and she&rsquo;ll
go on to Coney, the end of the line.
</p>

<!--<pb n="081"/>--><anchor id="Pg081"/>
<p>It&rsquo;s hard to talk on the subway. There&rsquo;s so
much noise you have to shout, which is hard
if you don&rsquo;t know what to say. Anyway, you
can&rsquo;t ask a girl for her phone number shouting
on the subway. At least I can&rsquo;t.</p>

<p>I&rsquo;m not so sure about the phone-number
business either. I sort of can&rsquo;t imagine calling
up and saying, &ldquo;Oh, uh, Mary, this is Dave. You
want to go to a movie or something, huh?&rdquo; It
sounds stupid, and I&rsquo;d be embarrassed. What
she said, it&rsquo;s true&mdash;it&rsquo;s sort of wonderful the way
we just ran into each other twice and had so
much fun.</p>

<p>So I&rsquo;m wondering how I can happen to run
into her again. Maybe the beach, in the fall.
Let&rsquo;s see, a school holiday&mdash;Columbus Day.</p>

<p>The train is pulling into Fourteenth Street.
I shout, &ldquo;Hey, how about we go to the beach
again this fall? Maybe Columbus Day?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;O.K.!&rdquo; she shouts. &ldquo;Columbus Day in the
morning.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Columbus Day in the morning&rdquo; sounds loud
and clear because by then the subway has
stopped. People snicker, and Mary blushes.</p>

<p>&ldquo;So long,&rdquo; I say, and we both wave, and the
train goes.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<!--<pb n="082"/>--><anchor id="Pg082"/>
  <index index="toc" level1="&nbsp;9. Fathers" />
  <index index="pdf"/>
  <head rend='right'>9</head>
<figure rend="width: 100%" url="images/image09.png">
  <figDesc>Illustration: Dave and Tom sitting on front steps with Cat.</figDesc>
</figure>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then>
    <p><lb/></p>
    <p rend='right'>FATHERS</p>
    <p><lb/></p>
  </then>
</pgIf>

<p>That operation didn&rsquo;t make as much difference
to Cat as you might think. I took him back to
the clinic to get the stitches out of his leg and
the bandages off. A few nights later I heard
yowls coming up from the backyard. I went
down and pulled him out of a fight. He wasn&rsquo;t
hurt yet, but he sure was right back in there
pitching. He seems to have a standing feud
with the cat next door.
</p>

<!--<pb n="083"/>--><anchor id="Pg083"/>
<p>However, he&rsquo;s been coming home nights regularly,
and sometimes in the cool part of the
morning he&rsquo;ll sit out on the front stoop with
me. He sits on a pillar about six feet above the
sidewalk, and I sit on the steps and play my
transistor and read.</p>

<p>Every time a dog gets walked down the street
under Cat&rsquo;s perch, he gathers himself up in a
ball, as if he were going to spring. Of course,
the poor dog never knows it was about to be
pounced on and wags on down the street. Cat
lets his tail go to sleep then and sneers.</p>

<p>Between weathercasts I hear him purring,
loud rumbly purrs, and I look up and see Tom
there, stroking Cat&rsquo;s fur up backward toward
his ears. Tom is looking out into the street and
sort of whistling without making any sound.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Gee, hi!&rdquo; I say.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Hi, too,&rdquo; he says. He strokes Cat back down
the right way, gives him a pat, and sits down.
&ldquo;I just been down to see your dad. He&rsquo;s quite
a guy.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Huh-h-h? You got sunstroke or something?
Didn&rsquo;t he read you about ten lectures on
Healthy Living, Honest Effort, Baseball, and
Long Walks with a Dog?&rdquo;
</p>

<!--<pb n="084"/>--><anchor id="Pg084"/>
<p>&ldquo;No-o-o.&rdquo; Tom grins, but then he sits and
stares out at the street again, so I wait.</p>

<p>&ldquo;You know,&rdquo; he says, &ldquo;you give me an idea.
<hi rend='italic'>You</hi> talk like <hi rend='italic'>your</hi> dad is a real pain, and that&rsquo;s
the way <hi rend='italic'>I</hi> always have felt about <hi rend='italic'>mine</hi>. But your
dad looks like a great guy to me, so&mdash;well, maybe
mine could be too, if I gave him a chance. Your
dad was saying I should.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Should what? You should go home?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;No. Your dad said I ought to write him a
long letter and face up to all the things I&rsquo;ve
goofed on. Quitting NYU, the cellar trouble,
all that. Then tell him I&rsquo;m going to get a job
and go to night school. Your dad figures probably
he&rsquo;d help me. He said he&rsquo;d write him, too.
No reason he should. I&rsquo;m nothing in his life.
It&rsquo;s pretty nice of him.&rdquo;</p>

<p>I try to digest all this, and it sure is puzzling.
The time I ran down that crumb of a doorman
on my bike, accidental on purpose, I didn&rsquo;t get
any long understanding talks. I just got kept in
for a month.</p>

<p>Tom slaps me in the middle of the back and
stands up. &ldquo;Hilda&rsquo;s gone back to work at the
coffee shop. I guess I&rsquo;ll go down and see her
<!--<pb n="085"/>--><anchor id="Pg085"/>
before the lunch rush, and then go home and
write my letter.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Say &lsquo;Hi&rsquo; for me.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;O.K. So long.&rdquo;</p>

<milestone unit="tb" rend="stars: 5" />

<p>The weather cools off some, and Pop starts to
talk about vacation. He&rsquo;s taking two weeks, last
of August and first of September, so I start shopping
around for various bits of fishing tackle and
picnic gear we might need. We&rsquo;re going to this
lake up in Connecticut, where we get a sort of
motel cottage. It has a little hot plate for making
coffee in the morning, but most of the rest of the
time we eat out, which is neat.</p>

<p>We&rsquo;re sitting around the living room one
evening, sorting stuff out, when the doorbell
rings. I go answer it, and Tom walks in. He nods
at me like he hardly sees me and comes into the
living room. He shakes hands like a wooden
Indian. His face looks shut up again, the way
it did that day I left him in the filling station.</p>

<p>He reaches in his pocket and pulls out a letter.
I can see a post-office stamp in red ink with
a pointing hand by the address. He throws it
down on Dad&rsquo;s table.
</p>

<!--<pb n="086"/>--><anchor id="Pg086"/>
<p>&ldquo;I got my answer all right.&rdquo;</p>

<p>Pop looks at the letter and I see his foot start
to twitch the way it does when he&rsquo;s about to
blow. But he looks at Tom, and instead of blowing
he just says, &ldquo;Your father left town? No forwarding
address?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;I guess so. He just left. Him and that woman
he married.&rdquo; Tom&rsquo;s voice trails off and he walks
over to the window. We all sit quiet a minute.</p>

<p>Finally Pop says gently, &ldquo;Well, don&rsquo;t waste
too much breath on her. She&rsquo;s nothing to do
with you.&rdquo;</p>

<p>Tom turns around angrily. &ldquo;She&rsquo;s no good.
She loafs around and drinks all the time. She
talked him into going.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;And he went.&rdquo; There&rsquo;s another short silence,
and Pop goes on. &ldquo;Where was this you lived?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;House. It was a pretty nice little house, too.
Dark red with white trim, and enough of a yard
to play a little ball, and I grew a few lettuces
every spring. I even got one ear of corn once.
We moved there when I was in second grade
because my mom said it was near a good local
school. I lived there till I went to college. I suppose
he sold it, or got a loan, and they lit off to
<!--<pb n="087"/>--><anchor id="Pg087"/>
drink it up. Soon&rsquo;s they&rsquo;d got <hi rend='italic'>me</hi> off their
hands.&rdquo;</p>

<p>Tom bites off the last word. Suddenly I can
see the picture pretty clear: the nice house, the
father Tom always talked down and hoped
would measure up. Now it&rsquo;s like somebody has
taken his whole childhood and crumpled it up
like a wad of tissue paper and thrown it away.</p>

<p>Mom gets up and goes into the kitchen. Pop&rsquo;s
foot keeps on twitching. Finally he says, &ldquo;Well,
I steered you wrong. I&rsquo;m sorry. But maybe it&rsquo;s
just as well to have it settled.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;It&rsquo;s settled, all right,&rdquo; Tom says.</p>

<p>Mom brings out a tray of ginger-ale glasses.
It seems sort of inadequate at a moment like
this, but when Tom takes a glass from her he
looks like he&rsquo;s going to bust out crying.</p>

<p>He drinks some and blows his nose, and Dad
says, &ldquo;When are you supposed to check in with
the Youth Board again?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Tuesday. My day off. And I wind up the
filling-station job the next week, right after Labor
Day.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Labor Day. Hm-m. We&rsquo;ve got to get moving.
If you like, I&rsquo;ll come down to the Youth Board
<!--<pb n="088"/>--><anchor id="Pg088"/>
with you, and we&rsquo;ll see what we can all cook up.
Don&rsquo;t worry too much. I have a feeling you&rsquo;re
just beginning to fight&mdash;really fight, not just
throw a few stones.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;I don&rsquo;t know why you bother.&rdquo; Tom starts
to stand up. But while we&rsquo;ve been talking, Cat
has been creeping up under the side table, playing
the ambush game, and he launches himself
at Tom just as he starts to stand. It throws him
off balance and he sits back in the chair, holding
Cat.</p>

<p>&ldquo;You&rsquo;ve got nothing to worry about,&rdquo; Pop
says. &ldquo;Cat&rsquo;s on your side.&rdquo;</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<!--<pb n="089"/>--><anchor id="Pg089"/>
  <index index="toc" level1="10. Cat and the Parkway"/>
  <index index="pdf"/>
  <head rend='right'>10</head>
<figure rend="width: 100%" url="images/image10.png">
  <figDesc>Illustration: Cat jumping out of car on parkway.</figDesc>
</figure>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then>
    <p><lb/></p>
    <p rend='right'>CAT AND THE PARKWAY</p>
    <p><lb/></p>
  </then>
</pgIf>

<p>Cat may be on Tom&rsquo;s side, but whether Pop is
on Cat&rsquo;s side is something else again. I worry
about this all the time we&rsquo;re planning the vacation.
Suppose the motel won&rsquo;t take cats? Or suppose
he runs away in the country? If he messes
up the vacation in any way, I know Pop&rsquo;ll say
to get rid of him.</p>

<p>I practice putting Cat back in the wicker
hamper to see if I can keep him in that sometimes,
<!--<pb n="090"/>--><anchor id="Pg090"/>
but he meows like crazy. That&rsquo;d drive
Pop nuts in the car, and it certainly wouldn&rsquo;t
hide him from any motel-keeper. So I just sit
back and hope for the best, but I got a nasty
feeling in the bottom of my stomach that something&rsquo;s
going to go haywire.</p>

<p>Pop&rsquo;s pretty snappish anyway. He&rsquo;s working
late nearly every night, getting stuff cleared up
before vacation. He doesn&rsquo;t want any extra problems,
especially not Cat problems. Mom&rsquo;s been
having asthma a good deal lately, and we&rsquo;re all
pretty jumpy. It&rsquo;s always like this at the end of
the summer.</p>

<p>Tuesday night when he gets home, I ask Pop
what&rsquo;s happened about Tom.</p>

<p>&ldquo;We&rsquo;ll work something out,&rdquo; he says, which
isn&rsquo;t what you&rsquo;d call a big explanation.</p>

<p>&ldquo;You think he can get back into college?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;I don&rsquo;t know. The Youth Board is going to
work on it. They&rsquo;re arranging for him to make
up the midyear exams he missed, so he can get
credit for that semester. Then he can probably
start making up the second semester at night
school if he has a job.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Apparently the Youth Board knew his father
had skipped&mdash;they&rsquo;ve been trying to trace him.
I don&rsquo;t think it&rsquo;ll do any good if they find him.
<!--<pb n="091"/>--><anchor id="Pg091"/>
Tom had better just cross him off and figure his
own life for himself.&rdquo;</p>

<p>You know, I see &ldquo;bad guys&rdquo; in television and
stuff, but with the people I really know I always
lump the parents on one team and the kids on
the other. Now here&rsquo;s my pop calmly figuring
a kid better chalk off his father as a bad lot and
go it alone. If your father died, I suppose you
could face up to it eventually, but having him
just fade out on you, not care what you did&mdash;that&rsquo;d
be worse.</p>

<p>While I&rsquo;m doing all this hard thinking, Pop
has gone back to reading the paper. I notice the
column of want ads on the back, and all of a
sudden my mind clicks on Tom and jobs.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Hey, Pop! You know the florist on the corner,
Palumbo, where you always get Mom the
plant on Mother&rsquo;s Day? I went in there a couple
of weeks ago, because he had a sign up, &lsquo;Helper
Wanted.&rsquo; I thought maybe it was deliveries and
stuff that I could do after school. But he said
he needed a full-time man. I&rsquo;m pretty sure the
sign&rsquo;s still up.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Palumbo, huhn?&rdquo; Pop takes off his glasses
and scratches his head with them. He looks at
his watch and sighs. &ldquo;They still open?&rdquo;</p>

<p>They are, and Pop goes right down to see the
<!--<pb n="092"/>--><anchor id="Pg092"/>
guy. He knows him fairly well anyway&mdash;there&rsquo;s
Mother&rsquo;s Day, and Easter, and also the shop is
the polling place for our district, so Pop&rsquo;s in
there every Election Day. He always buys some
little bunch of flowers Election Day because he
figures the guy ought to get some business having
his shop all messed up for the day.</p>

<p>Dad comes back and goes over to the desk and
scratches off a fast note. He says, &ldquo;Here. Address
it to Tom and go mail it right away. Palumbo
says he&rsquo;ll try him out at least. Tom can come
over Thursday night and I&rsquo;ll take him in.&rdquo;</p>

<p>Tom comes home with Pop Thursday about
nine o&rsquo;clock. They both look pretty good. Mom
has cold supper waiting, finishing off the icebox
before we go away, so we all sit down to eat.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Tom&rsquo;s all set, at least for a start,&rdquo; Dad says.
&ldquo;He&rsquo;s going to start Tuesday, right after Labor
Day. Palumbo can use him on odd jobs and deliveries,
especially over the Jewish holidays, and
then if he can learn the business, he&rsquo;ll keep
him on.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Never thought I&rsquo;d go in for flower-arranging.&rdquo;
Tom grins. &ldquo;But it might be fun. I&rsquo;m
pretty fair at any kind of handiwork.&rdquo;</p>

<p>Remembering how quick he unlocked the
<!--<pb n="093"/>--><anchor id="Pg093"/>
padlock to get Cat out in the cellar, I agree.</p>

<p>He starts for his room after supper, and we
all say &ldquo;good luck,&rdquo; &ldquo;have a good time,&rdquo; and
stuff. Things are really looking up.</p>

<p>I get up early the next morning and help
Mom button up around the house and get the
car loaded before Pop gets home in the afternoon.
He hoped to get off early, and I&rsquo;ve been
pacing around snapping my fingers for a couple
of hours when he finally arrives about six o&rsquo;clock.
It&rsquo;s a hot day again.</p>

<p>I don&rsquo;t say anything about Cat. I just dive in
the back seat and put him behind a suitcase and
hope he&rsquo;ll behave. Pop doesn&rsquo;t seem to notice
him. Anyway he doesn&rsquo;t say anything.</p>

<p>It&rsquo;s mighty hot, and traffic is thick, with everyone
pouring out of the city. But at least we&rsquo;re
moving along, until we get out on the Hutchinson
River Parkway, where some dope has to run
out of gas.</p>

<p>All three lanes of traffic are stopped. We sit
in the sun. Pop looks around, hunting for something
to get sore about, and sees the back windows
are closed. He roars, &ldquo;Crying out loud,
can&rsquo;t we get some air, at least? Open those windows!&rdquo;
</p>

<!--<pb n="094"/>--><anchor id="Pg094"/>
<p>I open them and try to keep my hand over
Cat, but if you try to hold him really, it makes
him restless. For the moment he&rsquo;s sitting quiet,
looking disgusted.</p>

<p>We sit for about ten minutes, and Pop turns
off the motor. You can practically hear us sweating
in the silence. Engines turn on ahead of us,
and there seems to be some sign of hope. I stick
my head out the window to see if things are
moving. Something furry tickles my ear, and it
takes me a second to register.</p>

<p>Then I grab, but too late. There is Cat, out
on the parkway between the lanes of cars, trying
to figure which way to run.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Pop!&rdquo; I yell. &ldquo;Hold it! Cat&rsquo;s got out!&rdquo;</p>

<p>You know what my pop does? He laughs.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Hold it, my eyeball!&rdquo; he says. &ldquo;I&rsquo;ve been
holding it for half an hour. I&rsquo;d get murdered
if I tried to stop now. Besides, I don&rsquo;t want to
chase that cat every day of my vacation.&rdquo;</p>

<p>I don&rsquo;t even stop to think. I just open the
car door and jump. The car&rsquo;s only barely moving.
I can see Cat on the grass at the edge of the
parkway. The cars in the next lane blast their
horns, but I slip through and grab Cat.</p>

<p>I hear Mom scream, &ldquo;Davey!&rdquo;</p>

<p>Our car is twenty feet ahead, now, in the center
<!--<pb n="095"/>--><anchor id="Pg095"/>
lane, and there&rsquo;s no way Pop can turn off.
The cars are picking up speed. I holler to Mom
as loud as I can, &ldquo;I&rsquo;ll go back and stay with Kate!
Don&rsquo;t worry!&rdquo;</p>

<p>I hear Pop shout about something, but I can&rsquo;t
hear what. Pretty soon the car is out of sight. I
look down at Cat and say, &ldquo;There goes our
vacation.&rdquo; I wonder if I&rsquo;ll be able to catch a
bus out to Connecticut later. Meanwhile, there&rsquo;s
the little problem of getting back into the city.
I&rsquo;m standing alongside the parkway, with railroad
tracks and the Pelham golf course on the
other side of me, and a good long walk to the
subway.</p>

<p>A cat isn&rsquo;t handy to walk with. He keeps trying
to get down. If you squeeze him to hang on,
he just tries harder. You have to keep juggling
him, like, gently. I sweat along back, with the
sun in my eyes, and people in cars on the parkway
pointing me out to their children as a local
curiosity.</p>

<p>One place the bulrushes and marsh grass beside
the road grow up higher than your head.
What a place for a kids&rsquo; hideout, I think. Almost
the next step, I hear kids&rsquo; voices, whispering and
shushing each other.</p>

<p>Their voices follow along beside me, but
<!--<pb n="096"/>--><anchor id="Pg096"/>
inside the curtain of rushes, where I can&rsquo;t see
them. I hear one say, &ldquo;Lookit the sissy with the
pussy!&rdquo; Another answers, &ldquo;Let&rsquo;s dump &rsquo;em in
the river!&rdquo;</p>

<p>I try to walk faster, but I figure if I run they&rsquo;ll
chase me for sure. I walk along, juggling Cat,
trying to pretend I don&rsquo;t notice them. I see a
drawbridge up ahead, and I sure hope there&rsquo;s
a cop or watchman on it.</p>

<p>The kids break out of the rushes behind
me, and there&rsquo;s no use pretending anymore. I
flash a look over my shoulder. They all yell,
&ldquo;Ya-n-h-h-h!&rdquo; like a bunch of wild Indians, but
they&rsquo;re about fifty feet back.</p>

<p>I grab Cat hard about the only place you can
grab a cat, around one upper forearm, and I
really run. The kids let out another war whoop.
It&rsquo;s uphill to the bridge. Cat gets his free forepaw
into action, raking my chest and arm, with
his claws out. Then he hisses and bites, and I
nearly drop him. I&rsquo;m panting so hard I can&rsquo;t
hardly breathe anyway.</p>

<p>A cop saunters out on my approach to the
bridge, his billy dangling from his wrist. Whew&mdash;am
I glad! I flop on the grass and ease up on
Cat and start soothing him down. The kids fade
<!--<pb n="097"/>--><anchor id="Pg097"/>
off into the tall grass as soon as they see the cop.
A stone arches up toward me, but it falls short.
That&rsquo;s the last I see of them.</p>

<p>As I cross the bridge, the cop squints at me.
&ldquo;What you doing, kid? Not supposed to be
walking here.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;I&rsquo;ll be right off. I&rsquo;m going home,&rdquo; I tell
him, and he saunters away, twirling his stick.</p>

<p>It&rsquo;s dark by the time I get to the subway, and
most of another hour before I&rsquo;m back in Manhattan
and reach Kate&rsquo;s. I can hear the television
going, which is unusual, and I walk in.
No one is watching television. Mom and Pop are
sitting at the table with Kate.</p>

<p>Mom lets loose the tears she has apparently
been holding onto for two hours, and Pop starts
bellowing: &ldquo;You fool! You might have got killed
jumping out on that parkway!&rdquo;</p>

<p>Cat drops to the floor with a thud. I kiss Mom
and go to the sink for a long glass of water and
drink it all and wipe my mouth. Over my
shoulder, I answer Pop: &ldquo;Yeah, but if Cat gets
killed on the parkway, that&rsquo;s just a big joke,
isn&rsquo;t it? You laugh your head off!&rdquo;</p>

<p>Pop takes off his glasses and scratches his head
with them, like he always does when he&rsquo;s thinking.
<!--<pb n="098"/>--><anchor id="Pg098"/>
He looks me in the eye and says, &ldquo;I&rsquo;m sorry.
I shouldn&rsquo;t have laughed.&rdquo;</p>

<p>Then, of all things, he picks up Cat himself.
&ldquo;Come on. You&rsquo;re one of the family. Let&rsquo;s get
on this vacation.&rdquo;</p>

<p>At last we&rsquo;re off.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<!--<pb n="099"/>--><anchor id="Pg099"/>
  <index index="toc" level1="11. Rosh Hashanah at the Fulton Fish Market" />
  <index index="pdf"/>
  <head rend='right'>11</head>
<figure rend="width: 100%" url="images/image11.png">
  <figDesc>Illustration: Dave picking out fish while Ben and garbage-sweeper watch.</figDesc>
</figure>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then>
    <p><lb/></p>
    <p rend='right'>ROSH HASHANAH AT THE FULTON FISH MARKET</p>
    <p><lb/></p>
  </then>
</pgIf>

<p>We came back to the city Labor Day Monday&mdash;us
and a couple million others&mdash;traffic crawling,
a hot day, the windows practically closed up tight
to keep Cat in. I sweated, and then cat hairs
stuck to me and got up my nose. Considering
everything, Pop acted quite mild.</p>

<p>I met a kid up at the lake in Connecticut
who had skin-diving equipment. He let me use
it one day when Mom and Pop were off sight-seeing.
<!--<pb n="100"/>--><anchor id="Pg100"/>
Boy, this has fishing beat hollow! I found
out there&rsquo;s a skin-diving course at the Y, and
I&rsquo;m going to begin saving up for the fins and
mask and stuff. Pop won&rsquo;t mind forking out
for the Y membership, because he&rsquo;ll figure it&rsquo;s
character-building.</p>

<p>Meanwhile, I&rsquo;m wondering if I can get back
up to Connecticut again one weekend while
the weather&rsquo;s still warm, and I see that Rosh
Hashanah falls on a Monday and Tuesday this
year, the week after school opens. Great. So I
ask this kid&mdash;Kenny Wright&mdash;if I can maybe
come visit him that weekend so I can do some
more skin diving.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Rosh Hashanah? What&rsquo;s that?&rdquo; he says.</p>

<p>So I explain to him. Rosh Hashanah is the
Jewish New Year. About half the kids in my
school are Jewish, so they all stay out for it, and
I always do too. Last year the school board gave
up and made it an official school holiday for
everyone, Jewish or not. Same with Yom
Kippur, the week after.</p>

<p>Kenny whistles. &ldquo;You sure are lucky. I don&rsquo;t
think we got any holidays coming till Thanksgiving.&rdquo;</p>

<p>I always thought the kids in the country were
<!--<pb n="101"/>--><anchor id="Pg101"/>
lucky having outdoor yards for sports and recess,
but I guess we have it over them on holidays&mdash;&rsquo;specially
in the fall: three Jewish holidays in
September, Columbus Day in October, Election
Day and Veterans&rsquo; Day in November, and then
Thanksgiving. It drives the mothers wild.</p>

<p>I don&rsquo;t figure it&rsquo;d be worth train fare to Connecticut
for just two days, so I say good-bye to
Kenny and see you next year and stuff.</p>

<p>Back home I&rsquo;m pretty busy right away, on
account of starting in a new school, Charles
Evans Hughes High. It&rsquo;s different from the
junior high, where I knew half the kids, and
also my whole homeroom there went from one
classroom to another together. At Hughes everyone
has to get his own schedule and find the right
classroom in this immense building, which is
about the size of Penn Station. There are about
a million kids in it&mdash;actually about two thousand&mdash;most
of whom I never saw before. Hardly any
of the Stuyvesant Town and Peter Cooper Village
kids come here because it isn&rsquo;t their district.
However, walking back across Fifth Avenue one
day, I see one kid I know from Peter Cooper.
His name is Ben Alstein. I ask him how come
he is at Hughes.
</p>

<!--<pb n="102"/>--><anchor id="Pg102"/>
<p>&ldquo;My dad wanted me to get into Peter Stuyvesant
High School&mdash;you know, the genius factory,
city-wide competitive exam to get in. Of
course I didn&rsquo;t make it. Biggest Failure of the
Year, that&rsquo;s me.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Heck, I never even tried for that. But how
come you&rsquo;re here?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;There&rsquo;s a special science course you can
qualify for by taking a math test. Then you don&rsquo;t
have to live in the district. My dad figures as
long as I&rsquo;m in something special, there&rsquo;s hope.
I&rsquo;m not really very interested in science, but that
doesn&rsquo;t bother him.&rdquo;</p>

<p>So after that Ben and I walk back and forth
to school together, and it turns out we have three
classes together, too&mdash;biology and algebra and
English. We&rsquo;re both relieved to have at least one
familiar face to look for in the crowd. My old
friend Nick, aside from not really being my
best friend anymore, has gone to a Catholic
high school somewhere uptown.</p>

<p>On the way home from school one Friday in
September, I ask Ben what he&rsquo;s doing Monday
and Tuesday, the Jewish holidays.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Tuesday I got to get into my bar mitzvah
suit and go to synagogue and over to Brooklyn
<!--<pb n="103"/>--><anchor id="Pg103"/>
to my grandmother&rsquo;s. Monday I don&rsquo;t have to
do anything special. Come on over with your
roller skates and we&rsquo;ll get in the hockey game.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;I skate on my tail,&rdquo; I say, because it&rsquo;s true,
and it would be doubly true in a hockey game.
I try quick to think up something else. We&rsquo;re
walking down the block to my house, and there&rsquo;s
Cat sitting out front, so I say, &ldquo;Let&rsquo;s cruise
around and get down to Fulton Fish Market and
pick up some fish heads for my cat.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;You&rsquo;re a real nut, aren&rsquo;t you?&rdquo; Ben says. He
doesn&rsquo;t say it as if he minds&mdash;just mentioning
the fact. He&rsquo;s an easygoing kind of guy, and I
think most of the time he likes to let someone
else make the plans. So he shrugs and says,
&ldquo;O.K.&rdquo;</p>

<p>I introduce him to Cat. Ben looks him in the
eye, and Cat looks away and licks his back. Ben
says, &ldquo;So I got to get you fresh fish for Rosh
Hashanah, huh?&rdquo;</p>

<p>Cat jumps down and rubs from back to front
against Ben&rsquo;s right leg and from front to back
against his left leg and goes to lie down in the
middle of the sidewalk.</p>

<p>&ldquo;See? He likes you,&rdquo; I say. &ldquo;He won&rsquo;t have
anything to do with most guys, except Tom.&rdquo;
</p>

<!--<pb n="104"/>--><anchor id="Pg104"/>
<p>&ldquo;Who&rsquo;s Tom?&rdquo;</p>

<p>So I tell Ben all about Tom and the cellar
and his father disappearing on him.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Gee,&rdquo; says Ben, &ldquo;I thought I had trouble,
with my father practically telling me how to
breathe better every minute, but at least he
doesn&rsquo;t disappear. What does Tom do now?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Works at the flower shop, right down there
at the corner.&rdquo;</p>

<p>Ben feels around in his pockets a minute.
&ldquo;Hey, I got two bucks I was supposed to spend
on a textbook. Come on and I&rsquo;ll buy Mom a
plant for the holidays, and you can introduce
me to Tom.&rdquo;</p>

<p>We go down to the flower shop, and at first
Tom frowns because he thinks we&rsquo;ve just come
to kid around. Ben tells him he wants a plant,
so then he makes a big thing out of showing
him all the plants, from the ten-dollar ones on
down, so Mr. Palumbo will see he&rsquo;s doing a good
job. Ben finally settles on a funny-looking cactus
that Tom says is going to bloom pretty soon.</p>

<p>Ben goes along home and I arrange to pick
him up on Monday. I wait around outside until
I see Tom go out on a delivery and ask him how
he likes the job. He says he doesn&rsquo;t really know
<!--<pb n="105"/>--><anchor id="Pg105"/>
yet, but at least the guy is decent to work for,
not like the filling-station man.</p>

<milestone unit="tb" rend="stars: 5" />

<p>I sleep late Monday and go over to Peter
Cooper about eleven. A lot of kids are out in
the playgrounds, and some fathers are there tossing
footballs with them and shouting &ldquo;Happy
New Year&rdquo; to each other. It sounds odd to hear
people saying that on a warm day in September.</p>

<p>Ben and I wander out of the project and he
says, &ldquo;How do we get to this Fulton Street?&rdquo;</p>

<p>I see a bus that says &ldquo;Avenue C&rdquo; on it stopping
on Twenty-third Street. Avenue C is way
east, and so is Fulton Street, so I figure it&rsquo;ll
probably work out. We get on. The bus rockets
along under the East Side Drive for a few blocks
and then heads down Avenue C, which is narrow
and crowded. It&rsquo;s a Spanish and Puerto Rican
neighborhood to begin with, then farther downtown
it&rsquo;s mostly Jewish. Lots of people are out
on the street shaking hands and clapping each
other on the back, and the stores are all closed.</p>

<p>Every time the bus stops, the driver shouts to
some of the people on the sidewalk, and he seems
to know a good many of the passengers who get
on. He asks them about their jobs, or their
<!--<pb n="106"/>--><anchor id="Pg106"/>
babies, or their aunt who&rsquo;s sick in Bellevue. This
is pretty unusual in New York, where bus
drivers usually act like they hate people in general
and their passengers in particular. Suddenly
the bus turns off Avenue C and heads west.</p>

<p>Ben looks out the window and says, &ldquo;Hey,
this is Houston Street. I been down here to a
big delicatessen. But we&rsquo;re not heading downtown
anymore.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Probably it&rsquo;ll turn again,&rdquo; I say.</p>

<p>It doesn&rsquo;t, though, not till clear over at Sixth
Avenue. By then everyone else has got off and
the bus driver turns around and says, &ldquo;Where
you two headed for?&rdquo;</p>

<p>It&rsquo;s funny, a bus driver asking you that, so
I ask him, &ldquo;Where does this bus go?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;It goes from Bellevue Hospital down to Hudson
Street, down by the Holland Tunnel.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Holy crow!&rdquo; says Ben. &ldquo;We&rsquo;re liable to wind
up in New Jersey.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Relax. I don&rsquo;t go that far. I just go back up
to Bellevue,&rdquo; says the driver.</p>

<p>&ldquo;You think we&rsquo;d be far from Fulton Fish
Market?&rdquo; I say.</p>

<p>The driver gestures vaguely. &ldquo;Just across the
island.&rdquo;
</p>

<!--<pb n="107"/>--><anchor id="Pg107"/>
<p>So Ben and I decide we&rsquo;ll get off at the end of
the line and walk from there. The bus driver
says, &ldquo;Have a nice hike.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;I think there&rsquo;s something fishy about this,&rdquo;
says Ben.</p>

<p>&ldquo;That&rsquo;s what we&rsquo;re going to get, fish,&rdquo; I say,
and we walk. We walk quite a ways.</p>

<p>Ben sees a little Italian restaurant down a
couple of steps, and we stop to look at the menu
in the window. The special for the day is
lasagna, and Ben says, &ldquo;Boy, that&rsquo;s for me!&rdquo;</p>

<p>We go inside, while I finger the dollar in my
pocket and do some fast mental arithmetic.
Lasagna is a dollar, so that&rsquo;s out, but I see
spaghetti and meat balls is seventy-five cents, so
that will still leave me bus fare home.</p>

<p>A waiter rushes up, wearing a white napkin
over his arm like a banner, and takes our order.
He returns in a moment with a shiny clean white
linen tablecloth and a basket of fresh Italian
bread and rolls. On a third trip he brings enough
chilled butter for a family and asks if we want
coffee with lunch or later. Later, we say.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Man, this is living!&rdquo; says Ben as he moves
in on the bread.</p>

<p>&ldquo;He treats us just like people.&rdquo;
</p>

<!--<pb n="108"/>--><anchor id="Pg108"/>
<p>Pretty soon the waiter is back with our lasagna
and spaghetti, and he swirls around the table as
if he were dancing. &ldquo;Anything else now? Mind
the hot plates, very hot! Have a good lunch now.
I bring the coffee later.&rdquo;</p>

<p>He swirls away, the napkin over his arm
making a little breeze, and circles another table.
It&rsquo;s a small room, and there are only four tables
eating, but he seems to enjoy acting like he was
serving royalty at the Waldorf. When we&rsquo;re just
finished eating, he comes back with a pot of
steaming coffee and a pitcher of real cream.</p>

<p>I&rsquo;m dolloping the cream in, and it floats, when
a thought hits me: We got to leave a tip for this
waiter.</p>

<p>I whisper to Ben, &ldquo;Hey, how much money you
got?&rdquo;</p>

<p>He reaches in his pocket and fishes out a buck,
a dime, and a quarter. We study them. Figure
coffees for a dime each, and the total check ought
to be $1.95. We&rsquo;ve got $2.35 between us. We
can still squeak through with bus fare if we only
leave the waiter a dime, which is pretty cheap.</p>

<p>At that moment he comes back and refills
our coffee cups and asks what we will have for
dessert.
</p>

<!--<pb n="109"/>--><anchor id="Pg109"/>
<p>&ldquo;Uh, nothing, nothing at all,&rdquo; I say.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Couldn&rsquo;t eat another thing,&rdquo; says Ben.</p>

<p>So the waiter brings the check and along with
it a plate of homemade cookies. He says, &ldquo;My
wife make. On the house.&rdquo;</p>

<p>We both thank him, and I look at Ben and he
looks at me. I put down my dollar and he puts
down a dollar and a quarter.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Thank you, gentlemen, thank you. Come
again,&rdquo; says the waiter.</p>

<p>We walk into the street, and Ben spins the
lone remaining dime in the sun. I say, &ldquo;Heads
or tails?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Huh? Heads.&rdquo;</p>

<p>It comes up heads, so Ben keeps his own
dime. He says, &ldquo;We could have hung onto
enough for <hi rend='italic'>one</hi> bus fare, but that&rsquo;s no use.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;No use at all. &rsquo;Specially if it was yours.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Are we still heading for Fulton Street?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Sure. We got to get fish for Cat.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;It better be for free.&rdquo;</p>

<p>We walk, threading across Manhattan and
downtown. I guess it&rsquo;s thirty or forty blocks,
but after a good lunch it doesn&rsquo;t seem too far.</p>

<p>You can smell the fish market when you&rsquo;re
still quite a ways off. It runs for a half a dozen
<!--<pb n="110"/>--><anchor id="Pg110"/>
blocks alongside the East River, with long rows
of sheds divided into stores for the different
wholesalers. Around on the side streets there are
bars and fish restaurants. It&rsquo;s too bad we don&rsquo;t
have Cat with us because he&rsquo;d love sniffing at all
the fish heads and guts and stuff on the street.
Fish market business is done mostly in the morning,
I guess, and now men are hosing down the
streets and sweeping fish garbage up into piles.
I get a guy to give me a bag and select a couple
of the choicer&mdash;and cleaner&mdash;looking bits. I get a
nice red snapper head and a small whole fish,
looks like a mackerel. Ben acts as if fish guts
make him sick, and as soon as I&rsquo;ve got a couple
he starts saying &ldquo;Come on, come on, let&rsquo;s go.&rdquo;</p>

<p>I realize when we&rsquo;re leaving that I don&rsquo;t even
notice the fish smell anymore. You just get used
to it. We walk uptown, quite a hike, along
East Broadway and across Grand and Delancey.
There&rsquo;s all kinds of intriguing smells wafting
around here: hot breads and pickles and fish
cooking. This is a real Jewish neighborhood, and
you can sure tell it&rsquo;s a holiday from the smell of
all the dinners cooking. And lots of people are
out in their best clothes gabbing together. Some
of the men wear black skullcaps, and some of
<!--<pb n="111"/>--><anchor id="Pg111"/>
them have big black felt hats and long white
beards. We go past a crowd gathering outside a
movie house.</p>

<p>&ldquo;They&rsquo;re not going to the movies,&rdquo; Ben says.
&ldquo;On holidays sometimes they rent a movie
theater for services. It must be getting near time.
Come on, I got to hurry.&rdquo;</p>

<p>We trot along the next twenty blocks or so,
up First Avenue and to Peter Cooper.</p>

<p>&ldquo;So long,&rdquo; Ben says. &ldquo;I&rsquo;ll come by Wednesday
on the way to school.&rdquo;</p>

<p>He goes off spinning his dime, and too late I
think to myself that we could have had a candy
bar.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<!--<pb n="112"/>--><anchor id="Pg112"/>
  <index index="toc" level1="12. The Red Eft" />
  <index index="pdf"/>
  <head rend='right'>12</head>
<figure rend="width: 100%" url="images/image12.png">
  <figDesc>Illustration: Dave holding up lizard for Ben by pond in woods.</figDesc>
</figure>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then>
    <p><lb/></p>
    <p rend='right'>THE RED EFT</p>
    <p><lb/></p>
  </then>
</pgIf>

<p>Ben and I both take biology, and the first
weekend assignment we get, right after Rosh
Hashanah, is to find and identify an animal
native to New York City and look up its family
and species and life cycle.</p>

<p>&ldquo;What&rsquo;s a species?&rdquo; says Ben.</p>

<p>&ldquo;I don&rsquo;t know. What&rsquo;s a life cycle?&rdquo;</p>

<p>We both scratch our heads, and he says,
&ldquo;What animals do we know?&rdquo;
</p>

<!--<pb n="113"/>--><anchor id="Pg113"/>
<p>I say, &ldquo;Cat. And dogs and pigeons and
squirrels.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;That&rsquo;s dull. I want to get some animal no
one else knows about.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Hey, how about a praying mantis? I saw one
once in Gramercy Park.&rdquo;</p>

<p>Ben doesn&rsquo;t even know what it is, so I tell
him about this one I saw. For an insect, it looks
almost like a dragon, about four or five inches
long and pale green. When it flies, it looks like
a baby helicopter in the sky. We go into Gramercy
Park to see if we can find another, but
we can&rsquo;t.</p>

<p>Ben says, &ldquo;Let&rsquo;s go up to the Bronx Zoo
Saturday and see what we can find.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Stupid, they don&rsquo;t mean you to do lions and
tigers. They&rsquo;re not native.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Stupid, yourself. They got other animals that
are. Besides, there&rsquo;s lots of woods and ponds. I
might find something.&rdquo;</p>

<p>Well, it&rsquo;s as good an idea for Saturday as any,
so I say O.K. On account of both being pretty
broke, we take lunch along in my old school
lunchbox. Also six subway tokens&mdash;two extras
for emergencies. Even I would be against walking
home from the Bronx.
</p>

<!--<pb n="114"/>--><anchor id="Pg114"/>
<p>Of course there are plenty of native New
York City animals in the zoo&mdash;raccoons and woodchucks
and moles and lots of birds&mdash;and I figure
we better start home not too late to get out the
encyclopedias for species and life cycles. Ben still
wants to catch something wild and wonderful.
Like lots of city kids who haven&rsquo;t been in the
country much, he&rsquo;s crazy about nature.</p>

<p>We head back to the subway, walking through
the woods so he can hunt. We go down alongside
the pond and kick up rocks and dead trees
to see if anything is under them.</p>

<p>It pays off. All of a sudden we see a tiny red
tail disappearing under a rotten log. I push the
log again and Ben grabs. It&rsquo;s a tiny lizard, not
more than two or three inches long and brick
red all over. Ben cups it in both hands, and its
throat pulses in and out, but it doesn&rsquo;t really
try to get away.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Hey, I love this one!&rdquo; Ben cries. &ldquo;I&rsquo;m going
to take him home and keep him for a pet, as well
as do a report on him. You can&rsquo;t keep cats and
dogs in Peter Cooper, but there&rsquo;s nothing in the
rules about lizards.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;How are you going to get him home?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Dump the lunch. I mean&mdash;we&rsquo;ll eat it, but I
<!--<pb n="115"/>--><anchor id="Pg115"/>
can stab a hole in the top of the box and keep
Redskin in it. Come on, hurry! He&rsquo;s getting
tired in my hand I think!&rdquo;</p>

<p>Ben is one of those guys who is very placid
most of the time, but he gets excitable all of a
sudden when he runs into something brand-new
to him, and I guess he never caught an animal
to keep before. Some people&rsquo;s parents are very
stuffy about it.</p>

<p>I dump the lunch out, and he puts the lizard
in and selects some particular leaves and bits of
dead log to put in with him to make him feel
at home. Without even asking me, he takes out
his knife and makes holes in the top of my lunchbox.
I sit down and open up a sandwich, but
Ben is still dancing around.</p>

<p>&ldquo;What do you suppose he is? He might be
something very rare! How&rsquo;m I going to find out?
You think we ought to go back and ask one of
the zoo men?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Umm, nah,&rdquo; I say, chewing. &ldquo;Probably find
him in the encyclopedia.&rdquo;</p>

<p>Ben squats on a log, and the log rolls. As he
falls over backward I see two more lizards
scuttle away. I grab one. &ldquo;Hey, look! I got another.
This one&rsquo;s bigger and browner.&rdquo;
</p>

<!--<pb n="116"/>--><anchor id="Pg116"/>
<p>Ben is up and dancing again. &ldquo;Oh, boy, oh,
boy! Now I got two! Now they&rsquo;ll be happy!
Maybe they&rsquo;ll have babies, huh?&rdquo;</p>

<p>He overlooks the fact that <hi rend='italic'>I</hi> caught this one.
Oh, well, I don&rsquo;t want a lizard, anyway. Cat&rsquo;d
probably eat it.</p>

<p>Ben takes it from me and slips it in the lunchbox.
&ldquo;I&rsquo;m going to call this one Big Brownie.&rdquo;</p>

<p>Finally he calms down enough to eat lunch,
taking peeks at his catch between mouthfuls. As
soon as he&rsquo;s finished eating, he starts hustling to
get home so he can make a house for them. He
really acts like a kid.</p>

<p>We get on the subway. It&rsquo;s aboveground&mdash;elevated&mdash;up
here in the Bronx. After a while I
see Yankee Stadium off to one side, which is
funny because I don&rsquo;t remember seeing it when
we were coming up. Pretty soon the train goes
underground. I remember then. Coming up, we
changed trains once. Ben has his eye glued to the
edge of the lunchbox and he&rsquo;s talking to Redskin,
so I figure there&rsquo;s no use consulting him.
I&rsquo;ll just wait and see where this train seems to
come out. It&rsquo;s got to go downtown. We go past
something called Lenox Avenue, which I think
is in Harlem, then Ninety-sixth Street, and then
we&rsquo;re at Columbus Circle.
</p>

<!--<pb n="117"/>--><anchor id="Pg117"/>
<p>&ldquo;Hey, Ben, we&rsquo;re on the West Side subway,&rdquo;
I say.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Yeah?&rdquo; He takes a bored look out the
window.</p>

<p>&ldquo;We can just walk across town from Fourteenth
Street.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;With you I always end up walking. Hey,
what about those extra tokens?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Aw, it&rsquo;s only a few blocks. Let&rsquo;s walk.&rdquo;</p>

<p>Ben grunts, and he goes along with me. As
we get near Union Square, there seem to be an
awful lot of people around. In fact they&rsquo;re
jamming the sidewalk and we can hardly move.
Ben frowns at them and says, &ldquo;Hey, what goes?&rdquo;</p>

<p>I ask a man, and he says, &ldquo;Where you been,
sonny? Don&rsquo;tcha know there&rsquo;s a parade for General
Sparks?&rdquo;</p>

<p>I remember reading about it now, so I poke
Ben. &ldquo;Hey, push along! We can see Sparks
go by!&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Quit pushing and don&rsquo;t try to be funny.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Stupid, he&rsquo;s a general. Test pilot, war hero,
and stuff. Come on, push.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;<hi rend='smallcaps'>quit pushing!</hi> I got to watch out for these
lizards!&rdquo;</p>

<p>So I go first and edge us through the crowd
to the middle of the block, where there aren&rsquo;t
<!--<pb n="118"/>--><anchor id="Pg118"/>
so many people and we can get up next to the
police barrier. Cops on horseback are going
back and forth, keeping the street clear. No sign
of any parade coming yet, but people are throwing
rolls of paper tape and handfuls of confetti
out of upper-story windows. The wind catches
the paper tape and carries it up and around in
all kinds of fantastic snakes. Little kids keep
scuttling under the barrier to grab handfuls of
ticker tape that blow to the ground. Ben keeps
one eye on the street and one on Redskin and
Brownie.</p>

<p>&ldquo;How soon you think they&rsquo;re coming?&rdquo; he
asks fretfully.</p>

<p>People have packed in behind us, and we
couldn&rsquo;t leave now if we wanted to. Pretty soon
we can see a helicopter flying low just a little
ways downtown, and people all start yelling,
&ldquo;That&rsquo;s where they are! They&rsquo;re coming!&rdquo;</p>

<p>Suddenly a bunch of motorcycle cops zoom
past, and then a cop backing up a police car
at about thirty miles an hour, which is a very
surprising-looking thing. Before I&rsquo;ve hardly got
my eyes off that, the open cars come by. This
guy Sparks is sitting up on the back of the car,
waving with both hands. By the time I see him,
<!--<pb n="119"/>--><anchor id="Pg119"/>
he&rsquo;s almost past. Nice-looking, though. Everyone
yells like crazy and throws any kind of paper
they&rsquo;ve got. Two little nuts beside us have a box
of Wheaties, so they&rsquo;re busy throwing Breakfast
of Champions. As soon as the motorcade is past,
people push through the barriers and run in the
street.</p>

<p>Ben hunches over to protect his precious
animals and yells, &ldquo;Come on! Let&rsquo;s get out of
this!&rdquo;</p>

<p>We go into my house first because I&rsquo;m pretty
sure we&rsquo;ve got a wooden box. We find it and
take it down to my room, and Ben gets extra
leaves and grass and turns the lizards into it.
He&rsquo;s sure they need lots of fresh air and exercise.
Redskin scoots out of sight into a corner
right away. Big Brownie sits by a leaf and looks
around.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Let&rsquo;s go look up what they are,&rdquo; I say.</p>

<p>The smallest lizard they show in the encyclopedia
is about six inches long, and it says lizards
are reptiles and have scales and claws and
should not be confused with salamanders, which
are amphibians and have thin moist skin and no
claws. So we look up salamanders.</p>

<p>This is it, all right. The first picture on the
<!--<pb n="120"/>--><anchor id="Pg120"/>
page looks just like Redskin, and it says he&rsquo;s a
Red Eft. The Latin name for his species is
<hi rend='italic'>Triturus viridescens</hi>, or in English just a common
newt.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Hey, talk about life cycles, listen to this,&rdquo;
says Ben, reading. &ldquo;&lsquo;It hatches from an egg in
the water and stays there during its first summer
as a dull-green larva. Then its skin becomes a
bright orange, it absorbs its gills, develops lungs
and legs, and crawls out to live for about three
years in the woods. When fully mature, its back
turns dull again, and it returns to the water
to breed.&rsquo;&rdquo;</p>

<p>Ben drops the book. &ldquo;Brownie must be getting
ready to breed! What&rsquo;d I tell you? We got
to put him near water!&rdquo; He rushes down to my
room.</p>

<p>We come to the door and stop short. There&rsquo;s
Cat, poised on the edge of the box.</p>

<p>I grab, but no kid is as fast as a cat. Hearing
me coming, he makes his grab for the salamander.
Then he&rsquo;s out of the box and away, with
Big Brownie&rsquo;s tail hanging out of his mouth.
He goes under the bed.</p>

<p>Ben screams, &ldquo;Get him! Kill him! He&rsquo;s got
my Brownie!&rdquo; He&rsquo;s in a frenzy, and I don&rsquo;t
blame him. It does make you mad to see your
<!--<pb n="121"/>--><anchor id="Pg121"/>
pet get hurt. I run for a broom to try to poke
Cat out, but it isn&rsquo;t any use. Meanwhile, Ben
finds Redskin safe in the box, and he scoops
him back into the lunchbox.</p>

<p>Finally, we move the bed, and there is Cat
poking daintily with his paw at Brownie. The
salamander is dead. Ben grabs the broom and
bashes Cat. Cat hisses and skids down the hall.
&ldquo;That rotten cat! I wish I could kill him!
What&rsquo;d you ever have him for?&rdquo;</p>

<p>I tell Ben I&rsquo;m sorry, and I get him a little
box so he can bury Brownie. You can&rsquo;t really
blame Cat too much&mdash;that&rsquo;s just the way a cat is
made, to chase anything that wiggles and runs.
Ben calms down after a while, and we go back
to the encyclopedia to finish looking up about
the Red Eft.</p>

<p>&ldquo;I don&rsquo;t think Brownie was really ready to lay
eggs, or he would have been in the pond already,&rdquo;
I say. &ldquo;Tell you what. We could go back
some day with a jar and try to catch one in the
water.&rdquo;</p>

<p>That cheers Ben up some. He finishes taking
notes for his report and tracing a picture, and
then he goes home with Redskin in the lunchbox.
I pull out the volume for C.</p>

<p>Cat. Family, <hi rend='italic'>Felidae</hi>, including lions and
<!--<pb n="122"/>--><anchor id="Pg122"/>
tigers. Species, <hi rend='italic'>Felis domesticus</hi>. I start taking
notes: &ldquo;&lsquo;The first civilized people to keep cats
were the Egyptians, thirteen centuries before
Christ.... Fifty million years earlier the ancestor
of the cat family roamed the earth, and
he is the ancestor of all present-day carnivores.
The Oligocene cats, thirty million years ago,
were already highly specialized, and the habits
and physical characteristics of cats have been
fixed since then. This may explain why house
cats remain the most independent of pets, with
many of the instincts of their wild ancestors.&rsquo;&rdquo;</p>

<p>I call Ben up to read him this, and he says,
&ldquo;You and your lousy carnivore! <hi rend='italic'>My</hi> salamander
is an amphibian, and amphibians are the ancestors
of <hi rend='italic'>all</hi>&nbsp; the animals on earth, even you and
your Cat, you sons of toads!&rdquo;</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<!--<pb n="123"/>--><anchor id="Pg123"/>
  <index index="toc" level1="13. The Left Bank of Coney Island" />
  <index index="pdf"/>
  <head rend='right'>13</head>
<figure rend="width: 100%" url="images/image13.png">
  <figDesc>Illustration: Dave and Mary in wind on boardwalk at beach.</figDesc>
</figure>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then>
    <p><lb/></p>
    <p rend='right'>THE LEFT BANK OF CONEY ISLAND</p>
    <p><lb/></p>
  </then>
</pgIf>

<p>Columbus Day comes up as cold as Christmas.
I listen to the weather forecast the night before,
to see how it&rsquo;ll be for the beach. &ldquo;High winds,
unseasonably low temperatures,&rdquo; the guy says.
He would.</p>

<p>I get up at eight-thirty the next morning,
though, figuring he&rsquo;d be wrong and it would be
a nice sunny day. I slip on my pants and shirt
and go downstairs with Cat to have a look out.
<!--<pb n="124"/>--><anchor id="Pg124"/>
Cat slides out and is halfway down the stoop
when a blast of cold wind hits him. His tail goes
up and he spooks back in between my legs. I
push the door shut against the icy wind.</p>

<p>Mom is sitting in the kitchen drinking her
tea and she says, &ldquo;My goodness, why are you up
so early on a holiday? Do you feel sick?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Nah, I&rsquo;m all right.&rdquo; I pour out a cup of coffee
to warm my hands on and dump in three or four
spoons of sugar.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Davey, have you got a chill? You don&rsquo;t look
to me as if you felt quite right.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Mom, for Pete&rsquo;s sake, it&rsquo;s <hi rend='smallcaps'>cold</hi> out! I feel
fine.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Well, you don&rsquo;t have to go out. Why don&rsquo;t
you just go back to bed and snooze and read a
bit, and I&rsquo;ll bring you some breakfast.&rdquo;</p>

<p>I see it&rsquo;s got to be faced, so while I&rsquo;m getting
down the cereal and a bowl, I say, &ldquo;Well, as a
matter of fact, I&rsquo;m going over to Coney Island
today.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Coney <hi rend='smallcaps'>island</hi>!&rdquo; Mom sounds like it was
Siberia. &ldquo;What in the world are you going to do
there in the middle of winter?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Mom, it&rsquo;s only Columbus Day. We figured
we&rsquo;d go to the aquarium and then&mdash;uh&mdash;well,
<!--<pb n="125"/>--><anchor id="Pg125"/>
fool around. Some of the pitches are still open,
and we&rsquo;ll get hot dogs and stuff.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Who&rsquo;s going? Nick?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Nick wasn&rsquo;t sure&mdash;I&rsquo;ll stop by his house and
see.&rdquo; I&rsquo;d just as soon steer clear of this &ldquo;who&rsquo;s
going&rdquo; business, so I start into a long spiel about
how we&rsquo;re studying marine life in biology, and
we have to take some notes at the aquarium.
Mom is swallowing this pretty well, but Pop
comes into the kitchen just then and gives me
the fishy eye.</p>

<p>&ldquo;First time I ever heard of you spending a
holiday on homework. I bet they got a new twist
palace going out there.&rdquo;</p>

<p>I slam down my coffee cup. &ldquo;Holy cats! Can&rsquo;t
I walk out of here on a holiday without going
through the third degree? What am I, some kind
of a nut or a convict?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Just a growing boy,&rdquo; says Pop. &ldquo;And don&rsquo;t
talk so sassy to your mother.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;I&rsquo;m talking to you!&rdquo;</p>

<p>Pop draws in a breath to start bellowing, but
Mom beats him to it by starting to wheeze,
which she can do without drawing breath.</p>

<p>Pop pats her on the shoulder and gives me a
dirty look. &ldquo;Now, Agnes, that&rsquo;s all right. I&rsquo;m not
<!--<pb n="126"/>--><anchor id="Pg126"/>
sore. I was just trying to kid him a little bit, and
he flies off the handle.&rdquo;</p>

<p><hi rend='italic'>I</hi> fly off the handle! How do you like that?</p>

<p>I give Mom a kiss. &ldquo;Cheer up, Mom. I won&rsquo;t
ride on the roller coaster. It&rsquo;s not even running.&rdquo;</p>

<p>I grab a sweater and gloves and money and
get out before they can start anymore questions.
On the subway I start wondering if Mary will
show up. It&rsquo;s almost two months since we made
this sort of crazy date, and the weather sure isn&rsquo;t
helping any.</p>

<p>Coney Island is made to be crowded and
noisy. All the billboards scream at you, as if they
had to get your attention. So when the place is
empty, it looks like the whole thing was a freak
or an accident.</p>

<p>It&rsquo;s sure empty today. There&rsquo;s practically no
one on the street in the five or six blocks from
the subway station to the aquarium. But it&rsquo;s
not quiet. There are a few places open&mdash;merry-go-rounds
and hot-dog shops&mdash;and tinny little
trickles of music come out of them, but the big
noise is the wind. All the signs are swinging and
screeching. Rubbish cans blow over and their
tops clang and bang rolling down the street. The
wind makes a whistling noise all by itself.
</p>

<!--<pb n="127"/>--><anchor id="Pg127"/>
<p>I lean into the wind and walk up the empty
street. My sweater is about as warm as a sieve.
I wonder if I&rsquo;m crazy to have come. No girl
would get out on a boardwalk on a day like this.
It must be practically a hurricane.</p>

<p>She&rsquo;s there, though. As soon as I turn the
corner to the beach, I can see one figure, with
its back to the ocean, scarf and hair blowing
inland toward me. I can&rsquo;t see her face, but it&rsquo;s
Mary, all right. There isn&rsquo;t another soul in sight.
I wave and she hunches her shoulders up and
down to semaphore, not wishing to take her
hands out of her pockets.</p>

<p>I come up beside her on the boardwalk and
turn my back to the ocean, too. I&rsquo;d like to go
on looking at it&mdash;it&rsquo;s all black and white and
thundery&mdash;but the wind blows your breath right
back down into your stomach. I freeze.</p>

<p>&ldquo;I was afraid you wouldn&rsquo;t come on a day like
this,&rdquo; I say.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Me too. I mean I was afraid <hi rend='italic'>you</hi> wouldn&rsquo;t.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Mom and Pop thought I was crazy. I spent
about an hour arguing with them. What&rsquo;d your
mother say?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Nothing. She thinks I&rsquo;m walking alone with
the wind in my hair, thinking poetic thoughts.&rdquo;
</p>

<!--<pb n="128"/>--><anchor id="Pg128"/>
<p>&ldquo;Huh? What for?&rdquo;</p>

<p>Mary shrugs. &ldquo;Mom&rsquo;s like that. You&rsquo;ll see.
Come on, let&rsquo;s go home and make cocoa or something
to warm up, and then we&rsquo;ll think up something
to do. We can&rsquo;t just stand here.&rdquo;</p>

<p>She&rsquo;s right about that, so I don&rsquo;t argue. Her
house is a few blocks away, a two-family type
with a sloped driveway going down into a cellar
garage. Neat. My pop is always going nuts hunting
for a place to park.</p>

<p>Mary goes in and shouts, &ldquo;Hi, Nina! I
brought a friend home. We&rsquo;re going to make
some cocoa. We&rsquo;re freezing.&rdquo;</p>

<p>I wonder who Nina is. I don&rsquo;t hear her mother
come into the kitchen. Then I turn around and
there she is. Holy crow! We got some pretty
beat-looking types at school, but this is the first
time I&rsquo;ve ever seen a beatnik mother.</p>

<p>She&rsquo;s got on a black T-shirt and blue jeans and
old sneakers, and her hair is in a long braid,
with uneven bangs in front.</p>

<p>Mary waves a saucepan vaguely at us both and
says, &ldquo;Nina&mdash;Davey&mdash;this is my mother.&rdquo;</p>

<p>So Nina is her mother. I stick out my hand.
&ldquo;Uh&mdash;how do you do?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Hel-looo.&rdquo; Her voice is low and musical. &ldquo;I
think there is coffee on the stove.&rdquo;
</p>

<!--<pb n="129"/>--><anchor id="Pg129"/>
<p>&ldquo;I thought I&rsquo;d make cocoa for a change,&rdquo;
says Mary.</p>

<p>&ldquo;All right.&rdquo; Nina puts a cigarette in her
mouth and offers one to me.</p>

<p>I say, &ldquo;No, thank you.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Tell me....&rdquo; She talks in this low, intense
kind of voice. &ldquo;Are you in school with Mary?&rdquo;</p>

<p>So I tell her I live in Manhattan, and how I
ran into Mary when I had Cat on the beach,
because that makes it sound sort of respectable,
not like a pickup. But she doesn&rsquo;t seem to be
interested in Cat and the beach.</p>

<p>&ldquo;What do you <hi rend='italic'>read</hi>? In your school?&rdquo; she asks,
launching each question like a torpedo.</p>

<p>I remember Mary saying something about her
mother and poetry, so I say, &ldquo;Well, uh&mdash;last week
we read &lsquo;The Highwayman&rsquo; and &lsquo;The Wreck of
the Hesperus.&rsquo; They&rsquo;re about&mdash;I mean, we were
studying metaphors and similes. Looking at the
ocean today, I sure can see what Longfellow
meant about the icy....&rdquo;</p>

<p>I thought I was doing pretty well, but she cut
me off again.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Don&rsquo;t you read any <hi rend='italic'>real</hi> poetry? Donne?
Auden? Baudelaire?&rdquo;</p>

<p>Three more torpedoes. &ldquo;We didn&rsquo;t get to
them yet.&rdquo;
</p>

<!--<pb n="130"/>--><anchor id="Pg130"/>
<p>Nina blows out a great angry cloud of smoke
and explodes, &ldquo;Schools!&rdquo; Then she sails out of
the kitchen.</p>

<p>I guess I look a little shook up. Mary laughs
and shoves a mug of cocoa and a plate of cinnamon
toast in front of me. &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t mind Mother.
She just can&rsquo;t get used to New York schools. Or
Coney Island. Or hardly anything around here.</p>

<p>&ldquo;She grew up on the Left Bank in Paris. Her
father was an artist and her mother was a writer,
and they taught her to read at home, starting
with Chaucer, probably. She never read a kids&rsquo;
book in her life.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Anything I ever tell her about school pretty
much sounds either childish or stupid to her.
What I really love is science&mdash;experiments and
stuff&mdash;and she can&rsquo;t see that for beans.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Our science teacher is a dope,&rdquo; I say, because
she is, &ldquo;so I really never got very interested in
science. But I told Mom and Dad I was coming
to the aquarium to take notes today, so they
wouldn&rsquo;t kick up such a fuss.&rdquo;</p>

<p>Mary shakes her head. &ldquo;We ought to get our
mothers together. Mine thinks I&rsquo;m wasting time
if I even <hi rend='italic'>go</hi> to the aquarium. I do, though, all
the time. I love the walrus.&rdquo;
</p>

<!--<pb n="131"/>--><anchor id="Pg131"/>
<p>&ldquo;What does your pop do?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Father? He teaches philosophy at Brooklyn
College. So I get it from both sides. Just think,
think, think. Father and Nina aren&rsquo;t hardly even
interested in <hi rend='italic'>food</hi>. Once in a while Nina spends
all day cooking some great fish soup or a chicken
in wine, but the rest of the time I&rsquo;m the only
one who takes time off from thinking to cook a
hamburger. They live on rolls and coffee and
sardines.&rdquo;</p>

<p>Mary puts our cups in the sink and then
opens a low cupboard. Instead of pots and pans
it has stacks of records in it. She pulls out <hi rend='italic'>West
Side Story</hi> and then I see there&rsquo;s a record player
on a side table. What d&rsquo;you know? A record
player in the kitchen! This Left Bank style of
living has its advantages.</p>

<p>&ldquo;I sit down here and eat and play records
while I do my homework,&rdquo; says Mary, which
sounds pretty nice.</p>

<p>I ask her if she has any Belafonte, and she
says, &ldquo;Yes, a couple,&rdquo; but she puts on something
else. It&rsquo;s slow, but sort of powerful, and it makes
you feel kind of powerful yourself, as if you
could do anything.</p>

<p>&ldquo;What&rsquo;s that?&rdquo; I ask.
</p>

<!--<pb n="132"/>--><anchor id="Pg132"/>
<p>&ldquo;It&rsquo;s called &lsquo;The Moldau&rsquo;&mdash;that&rsquo;s a river in
Europe. It&rsquo;s by a Czech named Smetana.&rdquo;</p>

<p>I wander around the kitchen and look out the
window. The wind&rsquo;s still howling, but not so
hard. I remember the ocean, all gray and powerful,
spotted with whitecaps. I&rsquo;d like to be out
on it.</p>

<p>&ldquo;You know what&rsquo;d be fun?&rdquo; I say out loud.
&ldquo;To be out in a boat on the harbor today. If you
didn&rsquo;t sink.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;We could take the Staten Island ferry,&rdquo; Mary
says.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Huh?&rdquo; I hadn&rsquo;t even thought there was really
any boat we could get on. &ldquo;Really? Where do
you get it?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Down at Sixty-ninth Street and Fourth
Avenue. It&rsquo;s quite a ways. I&rsquo;ve always gone there
in a car. But maybe we could do it on bikes, if
we don&rsquo;t freeze.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;We won&rsquo;t freeze. But what about bikes?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;You can use my brother&rsquo;s. He&rsquo;s away at college.
Maybe I can find a windbreaker of his,
too.&rdquo;</p>

<p>She finds the things and we get ready and go
into the living room, where Nina is sitting reading
and sipping a glass of wine.
</p>

<!--<pb n="133"/>--><anchor id="Pg133"/>
<p>&ldquo;We&rsquo;re going on our bikes to the ferry and
over to Staten Island,&rdquo; Mary says. She doesn&rsquo;t
even ask.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Oh-h-h.&rdquo; It&rsquo;s a long, low note, faintly
questioning.</p>

<p>&ldquo;We thought with the wind blowing and all,
it&rsquo;d be exciting,&rdquo; Mary explains, and I think,
Uh-o, that&rsquo;s going to cook it. <hi rend='italic'>My</hi> mother would
have kittens if I said I was going out on a ferry
in a storm.</p>

<p>But Nina just says, &ldquo;I see,&rdquo; and goes back to
reading her book. I say good-bye and she looks
up again and smiles, and that&rsquo;s all.</p>

<p>It&rsquo;s another funny thing&mdash;Nina doesn&rsquo;t seem
to pay any attention to who Mary brings home,
like most mothers are always snooping if their
daughter brings home a guy. Without stopping
to think, I say, &ldquo;Do you bring home a lot of
guys?&rdquo;</p>

<p>Mary laughs. &ldquo;Not a lot. Sometimes one of the
boys at school comes home when we&rsquo;re studying
for a science test.&rdquo;</p>

<p>I laugh, too, but what I&rsquo;m thinking of is how
Pop would look if I brought a girl home and
said we were studying for a test!</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<!--<pb n="134"/>--><anchor id="Pg134"/>
  <index index="toc" level1="14. Expedition by Ferry" />
  <index index="pdf"/>
  <head rend='right'>14</head>
<figure rend="width: 100%" url="images/image14.png">
  <figDesc>Illustration: Dave and Mary on ferry with other people.</figDesc>
</figure>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then>
    <p><lb/></p>
    <p rend='right'>EXPEDITION BY FERRY</p>
    <p><lb/></p>
  </then>
</pgIf>

<p>As we ride through Brooklyn the wind belts us
around from both sides and right in the teeth.
But the sun&rsquo;s beginning to break through, and
it&rsquo;s easy riding, no hills.</p>

<p>This part of Brooklyn is mostly rows of houses
joined together, or low apartment buildings,
with little patches of lawn in front of them.
There&rsquo;s lots of trees along the streets. It doesn&rsquo;t
look anything like Manhattan, but not anything
like the country, either. It&rsquo;s just Brooklyn.
</p>

<!--<pb n="135"/>--><anchor id="Pg135"/>
<p>All of a sudden we&rsquo;re circling a golf course.
What d&rsquo;you know? Right in New York City!</p>

<p>&ldquo;Ever play golf?&rdquo; The wind snatches the
words out of my mouth and carries them back
to Mary. I see her mouth shaping like a &ldquo;No,&rdquo;
but no sound comes my way. I drop back beside
her and say, &ldquo;I&rsquo;ll show you sometime. My pop&rsquo;s
got a set of clubs I used a couple of times.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Probably I better carry the clubs and you
play. I can play tennis, though.&rdquo;</p>

<p>We pass the golf course and head down into
a sort of main street. Anyway there&rsquo;s lots of
banks and dime stores and traffic. Mary leads
the way. We make a couple of turns and zigzags
and then go under the parkway, and there&rsquo;s the
ferry. It&rsquo;s taken us most of an hour to get from
Mary&rsquo;s house.</p>

<p>I&rsquo;m hoping the ferry isn&rsquo;t too expensive, so
I&rsquo;ll have plenty of money left for a good lunch.
But while I&rsquo;m mooning, Mary has wheeled her
bike right up and paid her own fare. Well, I
guess that&rsquo;s one of the things I like about her.
She&rsquo;s independent. Still, I&rsquo;m going to buy lunch.</p>

<p>The ferry is terrific. I&rsquo;m going to come ride
ferries every day it&rsquo;s windy. The boat doesn&rsquo;t
roll any, but we stand right up in front and the
wind blows clouds of spray in our faces. You can
<!--<pb n="136"/>--><anchor id="Pg136"/>
pretend you&rsquo;re on a full-rigged schooner running
before a hurricane. But you look down at
that choppy gray water, and you know you&rsquo;d be
done if you got blown overboard, even if it is
just an old ferryboat in New York harbor.</p>

<p>The ferry ride is fast, only about fifteen minutes.
We ride off in Staten Island and start thinking
where to go. I know what&rsquo;s first with me.</p>

<p>I ask Mary, &ldquo;What do you like, hamburgers
or sandwiches?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Both. I mean either,&rdquo; she says.</p>

<p>The first place we see is a delicatessen, which
is about my favorite kind of place to eat anyway.
I order a hot pastrami, and Mary says she never
had one, but she&rsquo;ll try the same.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Where could we go on Staten Island?&rdquo; I say.
&ldquo;I never was here before.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;About the only place I&rsquo;ve been is the zoo.
I&rsquo;ve been there lots of times. The vet let me
watch her operate on a snake once.&rdquo;</p>

<p>This is a pretty surprising thing for a girl to
tell you in the middle of a mouthful of hot
pastrami. The pastrami is great, and they put it
on a roll with a lot of olives and onions and
relish. Mary likes it too.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Is the vet a woman? Aren&rsquo;t you scared of
snakes?&rdquo;
</p>

<!--<pb n="137"/>--><anchor id="Pg137"/>
<p>&ldquo;Uh-un, I never was really. But when you&rsquo;re
watching an operation, you get so interested you
don&rsquo;t think about it being icky or scary. The vet
is a woman. She&rsquo;s been there quite a while.&rdquo;</p>

<p>I digest this along with the rest of my sandwich.
Then we both have a piece of apple pie.
You can tell from the way the crust looks&mdash;browned
and a little uneven&mdash;that they make it
right here.</p>

<p>&ldquo;So shall we go to the zoo?&rdquo; Mary asks.</p>

<p>&ldquo;O.K.&rdquo; I get up to get her coat and mine.
When I turn around, there she is up by the
cashier, getting ready to pay her check.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Hey, I&rsquo;m buying lunch,&rdquo; I say, steaming up
with the other check.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Oh, that&rsquo;s all right.&rdquo; She smiles. &ldquo;I&rsquo;ve got it.&rdquo;</p>

<p>I don&rsquo;t care if she&rsquo;s <hi rend='italic'>got</hi> it. I want to <hi rend='italic'>pay</hi> it. I
suppose it&rsquo;s a silly thing to get sore about, but
it sort of annoys me. Anyway, how do you maneuver
around to do something for a girl when
she doesn&rsquo;t even know you want to?</p>

<p>The man in the deli gives us directions to
get to the zoo, which isn&rsquo;t far. It&rsquo;s a low brick
building in a nice park. In the lobby there are
some fish tanks, then there&rsquo;s a wing for birds
on one side, animals on the other, and snakes
straight ahead.
</p>

<!--<pb n="138"/>--><anchor id="Pg138"/>
<p>We go for snakes. Mary really seems to like
them.</p>

<p>She says, &ldquo;The vet here likes them, and I guess
she got me interested. You know, they don&rsquo;t
really understand how a snake moves? Mechanically,
I mean. She&rsquo;s trying to find out.&rdquo;</p>

<p>We look at them all, little ones and big ones,
and then we go watch the birds. The keeper is
just feeding them. The parrot shouts at him,
and the pelican and the eagles gobble up their
fish and raw meat, but the vulture just sits on
his perch looking bored. Probably needs a desert
and a dying Legionnaire to whet his appetite.</p>

<p>In the animal wing a strange-looking dame
is down at the end, talking to a sleepy tiger.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Come on, darling, just a little roar. Couldn&rsquo;t
you give me just a soft one today?&rdquo; she&rsquo;s cooing
at him. The tiger blinks and looks away.</p>

<p>The lady notices us standing there and says,
&ldquo;He&rsquo;s my baby. I&rsquo;ve been coming to see him for
fourteen years. Some days he roars for me beautifully.&rdquo;</p>

<p>She has a short conversation with the lion,
then moves along with us toward the small cats,
a puma and a jaguar. She looks in the next cage,
which is empty, and shakes her head mournfully.
</p>

<!--<pb n="139"/>--><anchor id="Pg139"/>
<p>&ldquo;I had the sweetest little leopard. He died last
week. Would you believe it? The zoo never let
me know he was sick. I could have come and
helped take care of him. I might have saved his
life.&rdquo;</p>

<p>She goes on talking, sometimes to herself,
sometimes to the puma, and we cross over to look
at two otters chasing each other up an underwater
tunnel.</p>

<p>&ldquo;What is she, some kind of nut?&rdquo; Mary says.
&ldquo;Does she think this is her private zoo?&rdquo;</p>

<p>I shrug. &ldquo;I suppose she&rsquo;s a little off. But so&rsquo;s
my Aunt Kate, the one who gave me Cat. They
just happen to like cats better than people. Kate
thinks all the stray cats in the world are her children,
and I guess this one feels the same way
about the big cats here.&rdquo;</p>

<p>We mosey around a little bit more and then
head back to the ferry. I make good and sure I&rsquo;m
ahead, and I get to the ticket office and buy two
tickets.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Would you care for a ride across the harbor
in my yacht?&rdquo; I say.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Why, of course. I&rsquo;d be delighted,&rdquo; says Mary.</p>

<p>A small thing, but it makes me feel good.</p>

<p>Over in Brooklyn I see a clock on a bank, and
<!--<pb n="140"/>--><anchor id="Pg140"/>
it says five o&rsquo;clock. I do some fast calculating and
say, &ldquo;Uh-oh, I better phone. I&rsquo;ll never make it
home by dinnertime.&rdquo;</p>

<p>I phone and get Pop. He&rsquo;s home early from
work. Just my luck.</p>

<p>&ldquo;I got to get this bike back to this kid in
Coney,&rdquo; I tell him. &ldquo;Then I&rsquo;ll be right home.
About seven.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;What do you mean <hi rend='italic'>this</hi> bike and <hi rend='italic'>this</hi> kid?
Who? Anyway, I thought you were already at
Coney Island.&rdquo;</p>

<p>I suppose lawyers just get in the habit of asking
questions. I start explaining. &ldquo;Well, it was
awfully cold over in Coney, and we thought we&rsquo;d
go over to Staten Island on the ferry and go to
the zoo. So now we just got back to Brooklyn,
and I&rsquo;m downtown and I got to take the bike
back.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;So who&rsquo;s &lsquo;we&rsquo;? You got a rat in your pocket?&rdquo;</p>

<p>I can distract Mom but not Pop. &ldquo;Well, actually,
it&rsquo;s a girl named Mary. It&rsquo;s her brother&rsquo;s
bike. He&rsquo;s away in college.&rdquo;</p>

<p>All I can hear now is Pop at the other end of
the line, laughing his head off.</p>

<p>&ldquo;So what&rsquo;s so funny about that?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Nothing,&rdquo; he says. &ldquo;Nothing. Only now I can
<!--<pb n="141"/>--><anchor id="Pg141"/>
see what all the shouting was about at breakfast.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Oh.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;O.K. Now mind you get that girl, as <hi rend='italic'>well</hi> as
the bicycle of the brother who goes to college,
home safe. Hear? I&rsquo;ll tell your mother you narrowly
escaped drowning, and she&rsquo;ll probably
save you a bone for dinner. O.K.?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;O.K. Bye.&rdquo;</p>

<p>Him and his jokes. Ha, ha, ha. Funny, though,
him worrying about me getting Mary home safe,
when her own mother doesn&rsquo;t worry any.</p>

<p>We start along toward her house slowly, as
there&rsquo;s a good deal of traffic now. I&rsquo;m wondering
how to see Mary again without having to ask for
her number and phoning and making a date.
Something about telephoning I don&rsquo;t like. Besides,
I&rsquo;d probably go out to a pay phone so the
family wouldn&rsquo;t listen, and that&rsquo;d make me feel
stupid to begin with.</p>

<p>Just then we start rounding the golf course,
and I whack the handle bar of my bike and say,
&ldquo;Hey, that&rsquo;s it!&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;What&rsquo;s it?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Golf. Let&rsquo;s play golf. Not now, I don&rsquo;t mean.
Next holiday. We&rsquo;ve got Election Day coming
up. I&rsquo;ll borrow Pop&rsquo;s clubs and take the subway
<!--<pb n="142"/>--><anchor id="Pg142"/>
and meet you here. How about ten o&rsquo;clock?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Hunh?&rdquo; Mary looks startled. &ldquo;Well, I suppose
I could try, or anyway I could walk around.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;It&rsquo;s easy. I&rsquo;ll show you.&rdquo; The two times I
played, I only hit the ball decently about four or
five times. But the times I <hi rend='italic'>did</hi> hit it, it seemed
easy.</p>

<p>We get to Mary&rsquo;s house and I put the bikes
away and give her back her brother&rsquo;s jacket. &ldquo;I
guess I&rsquo;ll go right along. It&rsquo;s getting late. See you
Election Day.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;O.K., bye. Say&mdash;thanks for the ferry ride!&rdquo;</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<!--<pb n="143"/>--><anchor id="Pg143"/>
  <index index="toc" level1="15. Dollars and Cats" />
  <index index="pdf"/>
  <head rend='right'>15</head>
<figure rend="width: 100%" url="images/image15.png">
  <figDesc>Illustration: Cat eating turkey neck from bowl on floor.</figDesc>
</figure>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then>
    <p><lb/></p>
    <p rend='right'>DOLLARS AND CATS</p>
    <p><lb/></p>
  </then>
</pgIf>

<p>Wednesday night before Thanksgiving I go
down to the delicatessen to buy some coke, so I
can really enjoy myself watching TV. Tom is
just finishing work at the flower shop, and I ask
him if he wants to come along home.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Nah. Thanks. I got to be at work early tomorrow.&rdquo;
He doesn&rsquo;t sound too cheery.</p>

<p>&ldquo;How&rsquo;s the job going?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;O.K., I guess.&rdquo; We walk along a little ways.
<!--<pb n="144"/>--><anchor id="Pg144"/>
&ldquo;The job&rsquo;s not bad, but I don&rsquo;t want to be a
florist all my life, and I can&rsquo;t see this job will
train me for anything else.&rdquo;</p>

<p>That seems pretty true. It must be tough not
getting regular holidays off, too. &ldquo;You have to
work all day tomorrow?&rdquo; I ask.</p>

<p>&ldquo;I open the store up at seven and start working
on orders we&rsquo;ve already got. I&rsquo;ll get through
around three or four.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Hey, you want to come for dinner? We&rsquo;re
not eating till evening.&rdquo;</p>

<p>Tom grins. &ldquo;You cooking the dinner? Maybe
you better ask your mother.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;It&rsquo;ll be all right with Mom. Look, I&rsquo;ll ask
her and come let you know in the store tomorrow,
O.K.?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Hmm. Well, sure. Thanks. I&rsquo;ve got a date
with Hilda later in the evening, but she&rsquo;s got to
eat with her folks first.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;O.K. See you tomorrow.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Right.&rdquo;</p>

<p>Mom says it&rsquo;s all right about Tom coming, so
I go down and tell him in the morning. Turns
out Mom has asked Kate to have dinner with
us, too, which is quite a step. For Kate, I mean.
I think she would have turned the invitation
<!--<pb n="145"/>--><anchor id="Pg145"/>
down, except no one can bear to hurt Mom&rsquo;s
feelings. Kate&rsquo;s been in our house before, of
course, but then she just came in to chat or have
tea or something. It wasn&rsquo;t like an invitation.</p>

<p>She comes, and she looks like someone from
another world. I&rsquo;ve never seen her in anything
but her old skirts and sneakers, so the &ldquo;good
clothes&rdquo; she&rsquo;s wearing now must have been hanging
in a closet twenty years. The dress and shoes
are way out of style, and she&rsquo;s carrying a real old
black patent-leather pocketbook. Usually she
just lugs her old cloth shopping bag, mostly full
of cat goodies. Come to think of it, that&rsquo;s it: Kate
lives in a world that is just her own and the cats&rsquo;.
I never saw her trying to fit into the ordinary
world before.</p>

<p>Cat knows her right away, though. Clothes
don&rsquo;t fool him. He rubs her leg and curls up on
the sofa beside her, still keeping a half-open eye
on the oven door in the kitchen, where the
turkey is roasting.</p>

<p>Tom comes in, also in city clothes&mdash;a white
shirt and tie and jacket&mdash;the first time I ever saw
him in them. He sits down on the other side of
Cat, who stretches one paw out toward him
negligently.
</p>

<!--<pb n="146"/>--><anchor id="Pg146"/>
<p>Looking at Kate and Tom sitting there on the
sofa, both looking a little ill at ease, I get a funny
idea. My family is starting to collect people the
way Kate collects homeless cats. Of course, Kate
and Tom aren&rsquo;t homeless. They&rsquo;re people-less&mdash;not
part of any family. I think Mom always
wanted more people to take care of, so she&rsquo;s glad
to have them.</p>

<p>Kidding, I ask Kate, &ldquo;How many cats at your
home for Thanksgiving dinner?&rdquo;</p>

<p>She stops stroking Cat a minute and thinks.
&ldquo;Hmm, Susan&rsquo;s got four new kittens, just got
their eyes open. A beautiful little orange one
and three tigers. Then there&rsquo;s two big kittens,
strays, and one old stray tom. Makes eight, that&rsquo;s
all. Sometimes I&rsquo;ve had lots more than that.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Doesn&rsquo;t the landlord ever object?&rdquo; Pop asks.</p>

<p>Kate snorts. &ldquo;Him! Huh! I pay my rent. And
I have my own padlock on the door, so he can&rsquo;t
come snooping around.&rdquo;</p>

<p>We all sit down to dinner. Pop gives Cat the
turkey neck to crunch up in the kitchen. He
finishes that and crouches and stares at us eating.
Kate gives him tidbits, which I&rsquo;m not supposed
to do. I don&rsquo;t think she really wants to eat the
turkey herself. She&rsquo;s pretty strictly a fruit and
yogurt type.
</p>

<!--<pb n="147"/>--><anchor id="Pg147"/>
<p>After dinner Tom leaves to meet Hilda, and I
walk home with Kate, carrying a bag of scraps
and giblets for her cats. While she&rsquo;s fiddling with
the two sets of keys to open her door, the man
next door sticks his head out. &ldquo;Messenger was
here a little while ago with a telegram for you.
Wouldn&rsquo;t give it to me.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;A telegram?&rdquo; Kate gapes.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Yeah. He&rsquo;ll be back.&rdquo; The man looks pleased,
like he&rsquo;s been able to deliver some bad news,
and pulls his head in and shuts his door.</p>

<p>We go into Kate&rsquo;s apartment, and cats come
meowing and rubbing against her legs, and they
jump up on the sink and rub and nudge the bag
of scraps when she puts it down. Kate is muttering
rapidly to herself and fidgeting with her coat
and bag and not really paying much attention to
the cats, which is odd.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Lots of people send telegrams on holidays.
It&rsquo;s probably just greetings,&rdquo; I say.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Not to me, they don&rsquo;t!&rdquo; Kate snaps, also
sounding as if they better hadn&rsquo;t.</p>

<p>I go over to play with the little kittens. The
marmalade-colored one is the strongest of the
litter, and he&rsquo;s learned to climb out of the box.
He chases my fingers. Kate finishes feeding the
big cats, and she strides over and scoops him back
<!--<pb n="148"/>--><anchor id="Pg148"/>
into the box. &ldquo;You stay in there. You&rsquo;ll get
stepped on.&rdquo; She drops Susan back in with her
babies to take care of them.</p>

<p>The doorbell rings, and Kate yanks open the
door, practically bowling over an ancient little
messenger leaning sleepily against the side of
the door.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Take it easy, lady, take it easy. Just sign
here,&rdquo; he says.</p>

<p>She signs, hands him the pencil, and slams
the door. The orange kitten has got out again,
and Kate does come close to stepping on him as
she walks across the room tearing open the telegram.
He doesn&rsquo;t know enough to dodge feet
yet. I scoop him back in this time.</p>

<p>Kate reads the telegram and sits down. She
looks quite calm now. She says, &ldquo;Well, he died.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Huh? Who?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;My brother. He&rsquo;s the only person in the
world I know who would send me a telegram.
So he&rsquo;s dead now.&rdquo;</p>

<p>She repeats it, and I can&rsquo;t figure whether to
say I&rsquo;m sorry or what. I always thought when
someone heard of a death in the family, there&rsquo;d
be a lot of crying and commotion. Kate looks
perfectly calm, but strange somehow.
</p>

<!--<pb n="149"/>--><anchor id="Pg149"/>
<p>&ldquo;Has he been sick?&rdquo;</p>

<p>Kate shakes her head. &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t know. I haven&rsquo;t
seen him in twenty years.&rdquo;</p>

<p>There is silence a moment, and then Kate goes
on, talking half to herself and half to me. &ldquo;Mean
old coot. He never talked to anyone, except about
his money. That&rsquo;s all he cared about. Once he
tried to get me to give him money to invest.
That&rsquo;s the last time I saw him. He has an old
house way up in the Bronx. But we never did
get along, even when we were kids.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Did he have a wife or anything? Who sent
the telegram?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;He&rsquo;s had a housekeeper. Just as mean as him.
She&rsquo;d buy him day-old bread and dented cans
of soup because they were cheaper. She suited
him fine&mdash;saved him money and never talked to
him. Well, she&rsquo;ll get his money now, if he left
any. That&rsquo;s what she&rsquo;s been waiting for. She sent
me the wire.&rdquo;</p>

<p>Twenty years, I think. That&rsquo;s a long time not
to be speaking to your own brother, and him living
just a ten-cent phone call away. I wonder.
She couldn&rsquo;t just not give a hoot about him. They
must have been real mad at each other. And mad
at the whole world, too. Makes you wonder what
<!--<pb n="150"/>--><anchor id="Pg150"/>
kind of parents <hi rend='italic'>they</hi>&nbsp; had, with one of them growing
up loving only cats and the other only money.</p>

<p>Kate is staring out the window and stroking
the old stray tomcat between the ears, and it hits
me: there isn&rsquo;t a person in the world she loves or
even hates. I like cats fine, too, but if I didn&rsquo;t
have people that mattered, it wouldn&rsquo;t be so
good. I say &ldquo;So long&rdquo; quietly and go out.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<!--<pb n="151"/>--><anchor id="Pg151"/>
  <index index="toc" level1="16. Fortune" />
  <index index="pdf"/>
  <head rend='right'>16</head>
<figure rend="width: 100%" url="images/image16.png">
  <figDesc>Illustration: Reporters and photographers crowding in on Kate.</figDesc>
</figure>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then>
    <p><lb/></p>
    <p rend='right'>FORTUNE</p>
    <p><lb/></p>
  </then>
</pgIf>

<p>&ldquo;I always wondered if the poor soul had any
relatives.&rdquo; That&rsquo;s what Mom says when I tell her
about Kate&rsquo;s telegram. &ldquo;And now she&rsquo;s lost her
only brother. That&rsquo;s sad.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;I think it&rsquo;s sad she never talked to him for
twenty years. All these years I&rsquo;ve wished I had a
brother,&rdquo; I say.</p>

<p>&ldquo;If it&rsquo;s her only brother, she&rsquo;s going to have to
do something about his estate,&rdquo; says Pop. That
<!--<pb n="152"/>--><anchor id="Pg152"/>
legal mind, it never rests. I guess he&rsquo;s got a point
about this, though. How is Kate going to deal
with lawyers, or undertakers, or anyone? She
can&rsquo;t hardly stand to <hi rend='italic'>talk</hi>&nbsp; to people like that.</p>

<p>&ldquo;What&rsquo;ll she have to do?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Maybe I better go see her tomorrow,&rdquo; says
Pop. &ldquo;There can be lots of things&mdash;see if he left
a will, if he owes any taxes, if he has property that
has to be taken care of or sold. You can&rsquo;t tell.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Kate said he was a miser. Maybe he left her a
million. Say, that&rsquo;d be great!&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Don&rsquo;t be a dope!&rdquo; Pop snaps, and he really
sounds angry, so I pipe down.</p>

<p>The next morning Pop tells me to go over and
see how Kate is. &ldquo;The way she feels about people,
I don&rsquo;t like to just barge in. I&rsquo;ll come by in ten
minutes, like I was picking you up to go to a
movie or something.&rdquo;</p>

<p>I saunter round the corner onto Third Avenue
and stop short. There are two newspaper
cars pulled up in front of Kate&rsquo;s building, one
red and one black, and a sizable knot of people
gathered on the sidewalk. I move in among them.</p>

<p>&ldquo;That crazy cat lady ... he musta been a
nut too ... left her about a million ... a
lotta rich cats, how d&rsquo;ya like that....&rdquo;
</p>

<!--<pb n="153"/>--><anchor id="Pg153"/>
<p>So I guess he did leave her money, and all of
a sudden I see it isn&rsquo;t &ldquo;great.&rdquo; It&rsquo;s going to be
trouble. I push through the people and go upstairs
without anyone stopping me. When I open
Kate&rsquo;s door, old stray tomcat shoots out. He&rsquo;s
leaving, and I can see why.</p>

<p>Kate&rsquo;s room is tiny, and it looks like it&rsquo;s filled
with a mob. Maybe it&rsquo;s only half a dozen guys,
but the photographers are pushing around trying
to get shots and the reporters are jabbering.</p>

<p>Orange kitten sticks his head out of the box.
Then out he comes, into the sea of feet. I drop
him back in and try to get across to Kate. She&rsquo;s
pretty well backed into a corner and looking
ready to jump out the window. She has her arms
folded in front of her, each hand clenching the
other elbow, as if to hold herself together. A
reporter with a bunch of scratch paper in his
hand is crowding her.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Miss Carmichael&rdquo;&mdash;funny, I never even knew
her last name before&mdash;&ldquo;I just want to ask one or
two questions. Could you tell us when you last
saw your brother?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;No, I couldn&rsquo;t,&rdquo; she snaps, drawing her head
down between her shoulders and trying to melt
into the wall.
</p>

<!--<pb n="154"/>--><anchor id="Pg154"/>
<p>&ldquo;Watcha going to do with the money?&rdquo; a photographer
asks. He picks up a cat, one of the big
stray kittens, and dumps it on Kate. The cat
clings to her and the photographer says, &ldquo;Hold
it now. Just let me snap a picture.&rdquo;</p>

<p>He takes two steps back.</p>

<p>At the first step the room is silent. At the
second step a shattering caterwaul goes up. He
has stepped on the adventurous orange kitten.</p>

<p>The scream freezes us all, except Kate. She
shoots out of her corner, knowing instantly what
has happened. The kitten is jerking slightly now,
and bright, bright blood is coming out of its
mouth. With one violent, merciful stroke Kate
finishes it. She picks the limp body up and wraps
it neatly in a paper towel and places it in the
wastebasket.</p>

<p>The room is still silent for one congealed instant.
Kate seems almost to have forgotten the
crowd of men. Then two of them make hastily
for the door. The photographer shuffles his feet
and says, &ldquo;Gee, m&rsquo;am, I didn&rsquo;t mean ... I
wouldn&rsquo;t for the world....&rdquo;</p>

<p>Kate whirls and screams at him: &ldquo;Get out!
Get out, all of you! Leave me and my cats alone!
I never asked you in here!&rdquo;
</p>

<!--<pb n="155"/>--><anchor id="Pg155"/>
<p>At that moment my pop comes in the door.
Of course he doesn&rsquo;t know anything about the
kitten, but he takes in the general situation and
herds the two remaining newspapermen to the
door. He gives them his card and home address
and tells them to look him up a little later.</p>

<p>My knees suddenly feel weak and I slump
onto the sofa, and my eyes swivel round to the
little package in the wastebasket. It would be
the strongest one. I really never saw anything
get killed right in front of me before. It hits you.</p>

<p>Pop is trying to calm Kate down. She&rsquo;s facing
him, grabbing each sleeve of his coat. &ldquo;What am
I going to do? What can I do? I don&rsquo;t want his
money. I don&rsquo;t want anything from anyone. I
just want to be let alone!&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Take it easy, Kate, take it easy. You don&rsquo;t
have to let anyone into your apartment. About
the inheritance, well, I&rsquo;ll have to look into that.&rdquo;
Over his shoulder Pop signals to me to go home
and get Mom.</p>

<p>I go home and explain the situation to Mom,
and she comes back with me. One photographer
and a couple of reporters are still hanging
around, and the guy snaps a picture of me and
Mom at the door. Mom scoots on up. Bad as I
<!--<pb n="156"/>--><anchor id="Pg156"/>
feel, I still get a charge out of getting my picture
taken for a paper.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Hey, kid,&rdquo; one of the reporters shoves in
front of me, &ldquo;about this Miss Carmichael. Does
she act pretty strange, like talking to herself on
the street and stuff?&rdquo;</p>

<p>I see the story he&rsquo;s trying to build up. While
it&rsquo;s true in a way, if you really know Kate it&rsquo;s
not. Anyway, I&rsquo;m against it. I say, &ldquo;Nah. She&rsquo;s
all right. She&rsquo;s just sort of scared of people, and
she likes cats.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;How many cats she got?&rdquo;</p>

<p>There have been up to a dozen on a busy day,
but again I play it down. &ldquo;She&rsquo;s got a mother
cat with kittens. Sometimes a stray or two. Don&rsquo;t
get sucked in by all that jazz these dumb kids
around here&rsquo;ll give you.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;She gets all that money, you think she&rsquo;ll buy
a big house, set up a home for stray cats?&rdquo;</p>

<p>I shrug. &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t know. She doesn&rsquo;t want the
money anyway. She just wants to be let alone.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Doesn&rsquo;t want the money!&rdquo; the photographer
chips in. &ldquo;Boy, she must be <hi rend='italic'>really</hi> nuts! I&rsquo;m
going back to the office.&rdquo;</p>

<p>The reporter says he&rsquo;s going to wait and talk
<!--<pb n="157"/>--><anchor id="Pg157"/>
to my pop, and I go on upstairs to see what&rsquo;s
doing.</p>

<p>Kate is sitting on the sofa, sniffing and wiping
her eyes and muttering, but looking calmer.
Mom is making tea. Pop is looking out the window,
scratching his head.</p>

<p>Kate gulps and draws a big breath. &ldquo;Tell them
I don&rsquo;t want his old money. Tell them to give
it to someone else. Tell them to leave me alone.
I just want my own place and my cats. They can&rsquo;t
make me move, can they? I&rsquo;ve lived here thirty
years. I couldn&rsquo;t go anyplace else.&rdquo;</p>

<p>She gulps and sniffs some more, and Mom
brings her a cup of tea. The stray kittens jump
up to see if it&rsquo;s anything good and nuzzle into
her lap. Kate takes a sip of tea and asks Pop
again, &ldquo;They can&rsquo;t make me move, can they?&rdquo;
This seems to be what worries her most.</p>

<p>&ldquo;No-o,&rdquo; says Pop, &ldquo;it&rsquo;s only....&rdquo;</p>

<p>He&rsquo;s interrupted by a knock on the door, and
I go open it a crack. A guy says he&rsquo;s the landlord.
As soon as Kate hears his voice, she yelps at him,
&ldquo;I paid my rent, first of the month like always.
Don&rsquo;t you come bothering me!&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;It&rsquo;s about the cats,&rdquo; he says. &ldquo;People outside
<!--<pb n="158"/>--><anchor id="Pg158"/>
saying you got a dozen cats in here. There&rsquo;s a
law, you know.&rdquo;</p>

<p>He&rsquo;s a seedy-looking, whining kind of a man,
and he looks real pleased with himself when he
says there&rsquo;s a law about cats.</p>

<p>Kate jumps right at him. &ldquo;I&rsquo;m not breaking
any laws. I know you. You just want to get me
out of here and rent the place for more money.
You leave me alone!&rdquo;</p>

<p>The man whines, &ldquo;There&rsquo;s a law, that&rsquo;s all.
I don&rsquo;t want no violation slapped on my building.&rdquo;</p>

<p>Pop comes over and tells the man there&rsquo;s just
a mother cat with kittens. &ldquo;There&rsquo;s a couple of
strays here, too, right now, but I&rsquo;ll take them
home with me.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;There&rsquo;s a law, that&rsquo;s all. Also, I got a right
to inspect the premises.&rdquo; Pop shows no signs of
letting him in, and he shuffles and grumbles and
goes away.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Lock the door,&rdquo; Kate snaps. &ldquo;I keep it locked
all the time.&rdquo;</p>

<p>Pop says he&rsquo;s going home to make some phone
calls and try to figure out what&rsquo;s going on. He
takes down the name and address of Kate&rsquo;s
brother and asks her if she&rsquo;s sure there are no
<!--<pb n="159"/>--><anchor id="Pg159"/>
other relatives. She says she never heard of any.
Pop goes, and Kate insists that I lock the door
after him.</p>

<p>She gets up and starts stirring around getting
food out for the cats. She buys fish and chicken
livers for them, even though she hardly eats any
meat herself. She listens at the back door a
moment to make sure no one&rsquo;s out there, then
opens the door and puts out the garbage and
wastebasket. There goes the adventurous kitten.
You got to hand it to Kate. She has no sniffling
sentimentality about her cats. Kitten&rsquo;s dead, it&rsquo;s
dead, that&rsquo;s all. She doesn&rsquo;t mope over the limp
mite of fur. In fact, anything to do with cats
she&rsquo;s got sense and guts. They&rsquo;re her family. I
don&rsquo;t know that I could have put that kitten out
of its misery.</p>

<p>Just as long as the world doesn&rsquo;t throw any
stray fortunes at her, Kate does fine. But when
people get in her way, she needs someone like
Pop.</p>

<p>Mom says she&rsquo;ll stick around a while and tells
me to take the two stray kittens home, just in
case the landlord comes back trying to make
trouble.</p>

<p>&ldquo;O.K., great&mdash;Cat&rsquo;ll have some company!&rdquo;
</p>

<!--<pb n="160"/>--><anchor id="Pg160"/>
<p>Kate sniffs. &ldquo;He&rsquo;ll hate it. Cats don&rsquo;t like
other cats pushing into their house.&rdquo;</p>

<p>She&rsquo;s right, of course. I put the kittens down
at home, and Cat hisses at them and then runs
them under the radiator in the kitchen. Then
he sits down in the doorway and glowers at them,
on guard.</p>

<p>Things simmer down gradually. Mom and I
and sometimes Tom, who&rsquo;s right at the flower
shop on the corner, take turns checking on Kate
and doing shopping for her, or going with her
so she doesn&rsquo;t get badgered by people. But pretty
soon everyone in the neighborhood forgets all
about her and her inheritance. They see her
buying just the same old cat food and cottage
cheese and fruit, and they probably figure the
whole thing was a phony.</p>

<p>It wasn&rsquo;t though. Pop finds out her brother
did leave a will. He lined up his funeral, left
something to his housekeeper, something to a
little restaurant owner way downtown&mdash;apparently
that was his one big luxury, a decent meal
twice a year when he went down to buy more
stocks&mdash;and the rest to Kate.</p>

<p>Pop says it may take months or years to clear
up the estate, but he says Kate can get her share
<!--<pb n="161"/>--><anchor id="Pg161"/>
all put in trust for her with some bank, and
they&rsquo;ll take care of all the legalities and taxes and
just pay her as much or little as she wants out
of the income. And she can leave the whole kit
and caboodle to a cat home in her will if she
wants to, which will probably make her tightwad
brother spin in his grave. I asked her once,
and she said maybe she&rsquo;d leave some to the
Children&rsquo;s Aid, because there are a lot of stray
children in New York City that need looking
after, as well as cats. She&rsquo;s getting to think about
people some.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<!--<pb n="162"/>--><anchor id="Pg162"/>
  <index index="toc" level1="17. Telephone Numbers" />
  <index index="pdf"/>
  <head rend='right'>17</head>
<figure rend="width: 100%" url="images/image17.png">
  <figDesc>Illustration: Mary calling from phone booth at Macy&rsquo;s.</figDesc>
</figure>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then>
    <p><lb/></p>
    <p rend='right'>TELEPHONE NUMBERS</p>
    <p><lb/></p>
  </then>
</pgIf>

<p>There are some disadvantages to not getting a
girl&rsquo;s phone number. This sort of date I had
with Mary for golf on Election Day fell through.
In the first place, I was sick in bed with the flu,
and Mom wouldn&rsquo;t have let me out for anything,
and secondly, it was pouring rain. Without
the phone number, there wasn&rsquo;t any way I
could let her know, and I didn&rsquo;t even know a
street address to write to later.
</p>

<!--<pb n="163"/>--><anchor id="Pg163"/>
<p>By the time I got finished with the flu, we
were into Thanksgiving and then all the trouble
with Kate. Time passed and I felt rottener about
standing her up without a word, and I couldn&rsquo;t
get up my nerve to go out to Coney and just
appear on her doorstep. I could have found the
house all right, once I was out there.</p>

<p>The first week of Christmas vacation the
phone rings late one afternoon and Pop answers
it. He says, &ldquo;Just one minute, please,&rdquo; and I
know right away from his voice it isn&rsquo;t someone
he knows.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Young lady on the phone for you, Dave,&rdquo; he
says, and he enjoys watching me gulp.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Hullo?&rdquo; a rather tight, flat little voice asks.
&ldquo;Is this Dave&mdash;uh, Mitchell&mdash;uh, I mean, with
Cat?&rdquo;</p>

<p>I recognize it&rsquo;s Mary, all right, even if she does
sound strange and scared.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Oh, hi!&rdquo; I say. &ldquo;Sure, it&rsquo;s me! I&rsquo;m awfully
sorry about that day we were going to play golf.
I was in bed with the flu, and then I didn&rsquo;t know
your phone number or....&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Oh, that&rsquo;s all right,&rdquo; she says. &ldquo;I wondered
what happened.&rdquo;</p>

<p>There&rsquo;s a slight pause, and I see Pop grinning
<!--<pb n="164"/>--><anchor id="Pg164"/>
and pretending to read his paper. I turn around
so I won&rsquo;t see him.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Where are you now, out in Coney?&rdquo; I ask
Mary.</p>

<p>&ldquo;No, as a matter of fact, I&rsquo;m in Macy&rsquo;s.&rdquo; Her
voice trails off a little, but then she starts in
again. &ldquo;As a matter of fact, that&rsquo;s why I called.
You see, I was supposed to meet Mom here at
five, and she hasn&rsquo;t come, and I bought all these
Christmas presents, and I forgot about the tax
or something, and this is my last dime.&rdquo;</p>

<p>She stops. I see now why she sounds scared,
and I get a curdled feeling in my stomach, too,
because what if the dime runs out in the phone
and she&rsquo;s cut off? I&rsquo;ll never find her in Macy&rsquo;s.
It&rsquo;s too big.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Pop!&rdquo; I yelp. &ldquo;There&rsquo;s this girl I know is in
a phone booth in Macy&rsquo;s and her dime is going
to run out and she hasn&rsquo;t anymore money.
What&rsquo;ll I do?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Get the phone number of the booth and call
her back. Here&mdash;&rdquo; He gives me a pencil.</p>

<p>What a relief. Funny I never thought of that.
You just somehow don&rsquo;t think of a phone booth
having a number.
</p>

<!--<pb n="165"/>--><anchor id="Pg165"/>
<p>Mary sounds pretty relieved, too. I get the
number and call her back, and with Pop making
suggestions here and there we settle that I&rsquo;ll
go over to Macy&rsquo;s and meet her on the ground
floor near Thirty-fourth Street and Broadway at
the counter where they&rsquo;re selling umbrellas for
$2.89, which Mary says she can see from the
phone booth.</p>

<p>&ldquo;O.K.&rdquo; I say, and then I sort of don&rsquo;t want to
hang up. It&rsquo;s fun talking. So I go on. &ldquo;Look, just
in case we miss each other at Macy&rsquo;s, what&rsquo;s
your phone number at home, so I could call you
sometime?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;COney 7-1218.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;O.K. Well, good-bye. I&rsquo;ll be right over. To
Macy&rsquo;s, I mean.&rdquo;</p>

<p>I grab my coat and check to see if I&rsquo;ve got
money. Pop asks if I&rsquo;m going to bring her home
for dinner.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Gee, I don&rsquo;t know.&rdquo; I hadn&rsquo;t given a thought
to what we&rsquo;d do. &ldquo;I guess so, maybe, if her
mother hasn&rsquo;t come by then. I&rsquo;ll call you if we
do anything else.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;O.K.,&rdquo; Pop says.</p>

<p>I go out and hustle through the evening rush-hour
<!--<pb n="166"/>--><anchor id="Pg166"/>
crowds to the subway. The stores are all
open evenings now, for Christmas, so the crowds
are going both ways.</p>

<p>I get to the right corner of Macy&rsquo;s, and I see
Mary right away. Everyone else is rushing about
and muttering to themselves, and she&rsquo;s standing
there looking lost. In fact she looks so much like
a waif that the first thing I say is, &ldquo;Hi! Shall we
go get something to eat?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Yes, I&rsquo;m starved. I was just going to get a
doughnut when I found I&rsquo;d run out of money.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Let&rsquo;s go home and you can have dinner with
us then. But what about your mother? Won&rsquo;t
she be looking for you?&rdquo;</p>

<p>Mary shifts her feet and looks tired. &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t
know. Probably if she came and I wasn&rsquo;t here,
she&rsquo;d figure I&rsquo;d gone home.&rdquo;</p>

<p>I try to think a minute, which is hard to do
with all these people shoving around you. Mary
starts to pick up her two enormous shopping
bags, and I take them from her, still trying to
think. At the subway entrance I see the phone
booth.</p>

<p>&ldquo;That&rsquo;s the thing,&rdquo; I say. &ldquo;Why don&rsquo;t you call
your house and see if your mother left a message
or something?&rdquo;
</p>

<!--<pb n="167"/>--><anchor id="Pg167"/>
<p>&ldquo;Well....&rdquo; Mary stands by the phone looking
confused and in fact about ready to cry. I
suddenly decide the best thing we can do is get
home and sit down where it&rsquo;s quiet. Waiting
fifteen minutes or so to phone can&rsquo;t make much
difference.</p>

<p>We get home pretty fast and I introduce Mary
to Mom and Pop. She sinks into the nearest chair
and takes off her shoes.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Excuse me,&rdquo; she says. &ldquo;I just bought these
heels, and it&rsquo;s awful wearing them!&rdquo;</p>

<p>She wiggles her toes and begins to look better.
Mom offers her a pair of slippers and Pop passes
some potato chips.</p>

<p>Mom says, &ldquo;Poor child, did you try to do all
your Christmas shopping at once?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Well, actually, I was having fun just looking
for a long while. I have two little cousins
that I don&rsquo;t really have to get much for, but I
love looking at all the toys. I spent quite a while
there. Then I did the rest of my shopping in a
rush, and everything is so crowded, and I got
mixed up on my money or the sales tax and
only had a dime left, and I missed my mother
or she forgot.&rdquo;</p>

<p>She stretches out her toes to touch Cat, who
<!--<pb n="168"/>--><anchor id="Pg168"/>
is sitting in front of her. &ldquo;I couldn&rsquo;t think what
to do. It&rsquo;s so hard to think when your feet hurt.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;It certainly is,&rdquo; agrees Mom. She goes out
to the kitchen to finish fixing dinner, and Pop
suggests Mary better phone her home. She gets
her father, and her mother has left a message
that she was delayed and figured Mary would
go home alone. Mary gives her father our address
and tells him she&rsquo;ll be home by nine.</p>

<p>We must have hit a lucky day because we
have a real good dinner: slices of good whole
meat, not mushed up stuff, and potatoes cooked
with cheese in them, and salad, and a lemon
meringue pie from the bakery, even.</p>

<p>After dinner we sit around a little while, and
Pop says I better take Mary home, and he gives
me money for a cab at the end of the subway.
When Mary gives the driver her home address,
I say it over to myself a few times so I&rsquo;ll remember.</p>

<p>Suddenly I wonder about something. &ldquo;Say,
how&rsquo;d you know <hi rend='italic'>my</hi> phone number?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;I looked it up,&rdquo; she says simply. &ldquo;There&rsquo;s
about twenty-eleven Mitchells in the Manhattan
phone book, but only one in the East Twenties,
so I figured that must be you.&rdquo;
</p>

<!--<pb n="169"/>--><anchor id="Pg169"/>
<p>&ldquo;Gee, that&rsquo;s true. You must have had an
awful time, though, standing in the phone booth
with your feet hurting, going through all those
Mitchells.&rdquo;</p>

<p>Says Mary, &ldquo;Oh, no. I did it one rainy afternoon
at home, weeks ago.&rdquo;</p>

<p>Well, what do you know.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<!--<pb n="170"/>--><anchor id="Pg170"/>
  <index index="toc" level1="18. &ldquo;Here&rsquo;s to Cat!&rdquo;" />
  <index index="pdf"/>
  <head rend='right'>18</head>
<figure rend="width: 100%" url="images/image18.png">
  <figDesc>Illustration: Raised champagne glasses toasting Cat.</figDesc>
</figure>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then>
    <p><lb/></p>
    <p rend='right'>&ldquo;HERE&rsquo;S TO CAT!&rdquo;</p>
    <p><lb/></p>
  </then>
</pgIf>

<p>The two stray kittens gradually make themselves
at home. Somehow or other Cat has taught
them that he&rsquo;s in charge here, and he just chases
them for fun now and again, when he&rsquo;s not busy
sleeping.</p>

<p>As for keeping cats in my room, that&rsquo;s pretty
well forgotten. For one thing, Mom really likes
them. She sneaks the kittens saucers of cream
and bits of real hamburger when no one&rsquo;s looking,
<!--<pb n="171"/>--><anchor id="Pg171"/>
and she likes talking to them in the kitchen.
She doesn&rsquo;t pick them up, but just having them
in the room sure doesn&rsquo;t give her asthma.</p>

<p>The only time we have any trouble from the
cats is one evening when Pop comes home and
the two kittens skid down the hall between his
legs, with Cat after them. He scales his hat at
the lot of them and roars down the hall to me,
&ldquo;Hey, Davey! When are you getting rid of these
cats? I&rsquo;m not fixing to start an annex to Kate&rsquo;s
cat home!&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;I&rsquo;m sure Davey will find homes for them,&rdquo;
Mom says soothingly, but getting a little short
of breath, the way she does any time she&rsquo;s afraid
one of us is losing his temper.</p>

<p>In fact, one thing this cat business seems to
have established is that me and Pop fighting is
the main cause of Mom&rsquo;s asthma. So we both try
to do a little better, and a lot of things we used
to argue and fight about, like my jazz records,
we just kid each other about now. But now and
then we still work up to a real hassle.</p>

<p>I&rsquo;ve been taking a history course the first
semester at school. It&rsquo;s a real lemon&mdash;just a lot
of preaching about government and citizenship.
The second semester I switch to a music course.
<!--<pb n="172"/>--><anchor id="Pg172"/>
This is O.K. with the school&mdash;but not with Pop.
Right away when I bring home my new program,
he says, &ldquo;How come you&rsquo;re taking one less
course this half?&rdquo;</p>

<p>I explain that I&rsquo;m taking music, and also
biology, algebra, English, and French.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Music!&rdquo; he snorts. &ldquo;That&rsquo;s recreation, not a
course. Do it on your own time!&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Pop, it&rsquo;s a course. You think the school signs
me up for an hour of home record playing?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;They might,&rdquo; he grunts. &ldquo;You&rsquo;re not going
to loaf your way through school if I have anything
to say about it.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Loaf!&rdquo; I yelp. &ldquo;Four major academic subjects
is more than lots of the guys take.&rdquo;</p>

<p>Mom comes and suggests that Pop better go
over to school with me and talk it over at the
school office. He does, and for once I win a
round&mdash;I keep music for this semester. But he
makes sure that next year I&rsquo;m signed up all
year for five majors: English, French, math,
chemistry, and European history. I&rsquo;ll be lucky
if I have time to breathe.</p>

<p>I go down to the flower shop to grouse to
Tom. It&rsquo;s after Valentine&rsquo;s Day, and business is
slack and the boss is out.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Why does Pop have to come butting into my
<!--<pb n="173"/>--><anchor id="Pg173"/>
business at school? Doesn&rsquo;t he even think the
school knows what it&rsquo;s doing?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Aw, heck,&rdquo; says Tom, &ldquo;your father&rsquo;s the one
has to see you get into college or get a job. Sometimes
schools do let kids take a lot of soft courses,
and then they&rsquo;re out on a limb later.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Huh. He just likes to boss everything I do.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;So&mdash;he cares.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Huh.&rdquo; I&rsquo;m not very ready to buy this, but
then I remember Tom&rsquo;s father, who <hi rend='italic'>doesn&rsquo;t</hi>
care. It makes me think.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Besides,&rdquo; says Tom, &ldquo;half the reason you
and your father are always bickering is that
you&rsquo;re so much alike.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Me? Like <hi rend='italic'>him</hi>?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Sure. You&rsquo;re both impatient and curious, got
to poke into everything. As long as there&rsquo;s a
bone on the floor, the two of you worry it.&rdquo;</p>

<p>Mr. Palumbo comes back to the shop then,
and Tom gets busy with the plants. I go home,
wondering if I really am at all like Pop. I never
thought of it before.</p>

<p>It&rsquo;s funny about fights. Pop and I can go along
real smooth and easy for a while, and I think:
Well, he really isn&rsquo;t a bad guy, and I&rsquo;m growing
up, we can see eye to eye&mdash;all that stuff. Then,
whoosh! I hardly know what starts it, but a fight
<!--<pb n="174"/>--><anchor id="Pg174"/>
boils up, and we&rsquo;re both breathing fire like
dragons on the loose.</p>

<p>We get a holiday Washington&rsquo;s Birthday,
which is good because there&rsquo;s a TV program on
Tuesday, the night before the holiday, that I
hardly ever get to watch. It&rsquo;s called <hi rend='italic'>Out Beyond</hi>,
and the people in it are very real, not just good
guys and bad guys. There&rsquo;s always one character
moving around, keeping you on the edge of your
chair, and by the time it all winds up in a surprise
ending, you find this character is not a real
person, he&rsquo;s supernatural. The program goes on
till eleven o&rsquo;clock, and Mom won&rsquo;t let me watch
it on school nights.</p>

<p>I get the pillows comfortably arranged on the
floor, with a big bottle of soda and a bag of popcorn
within easy reach. The story starts off with
some nature shots of a farm and mountains in
the background and this little kid playing with
his grandfather. There&rsquo;s a lot of people in it, but
gradually you get more and more suspicious of
dear old grandpa. He&rsquo;s taking the kid for a walk
when a thunderstorm blows up.</p>

<p>Right then, of course, we have to have the
alternate sponsor. He signs off, finally, and up
comes Pop.
</p>

<!--<pb n="175"/>--><anchor id="Pg175"/>
<p>&ldquo;Here, Davey old boy, we can do better than
that tonight. The Governor and the Mayor are
on a TV debate about New York City school
reorganization.&rdquo;</p>

<p>At first I figure he&rsquo;s kidding, so I just growl,
&ldquo;Who cares?&rdquo;</p>

<p>He switches the channel.</p>

<p>I jump up, tipping over the bottle of soda on
the way. &ldquo;Pop, that&rsquo;s not fair! I&rsquo;m right in the
middle of a program, and I been waiting weeks
to watch it because Mom won&rsquo;t let me on school
nights!&rdquo;</p>

<p>Pop goes right on tuning his channel. &ldquo;Do
you good to listen to a real program for a
change. There&rsquo;ll be another western on tomorrow
night.&rdquo;</p>

<p>That&rsquo;s the last straw. I shout, &ldquo;See? You don&rsquo;t
even know what you&rsquo;re talking about! It&rsquo;s not
a western.&rdquo;</p>

<p>Pop looks at me prissily. &ldquo;You&rsquo;re getting altogether
too upset about these programs. Stop it
and behave yourself. Go get a sponge to mop
up the soda.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;It&rsquo;s your fault! Mop it up yourself!&rdquo; I&rsquo;m too
mad now to care what I say. I charge down the
hall to my room and slam the door.
</p>

<!--<pb n="176"/>--><anchor id="Pg176"/>
<p>I hear the TV going for a few minutes, then
Pop turns it off and goes in the kitchen to talk
to Mom. In a little while he comes down and
knocks on my door. Knocks&mdash;that&rsquo;s something.
Usually he just barges in.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Look here now, Dave, we&rsquo;ve got to straighten
a few things out quietly. Your mother says she
told you you could watch that program, whatever
it was. So O.K., go ahead, you can finish it.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Yeah, it&rsquo;s about over by now.&rdquo; I&rsquo;m still sore,
and besides Pop&rsquo;s still standing in my door, so I
figure there&rsquo;s a hitch in this somewhere.</p>

<p>&ldquo;But anyway, you shouldn&rsquo;t get so sore about
an old television program that you shout &lsquo;Mop
it up yourself&rsquo; at me.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Hmm.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Hmm, nothing.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Well, I don&rsquo;t think you should turn a guy&rsquo;s
TV program off in the middle without even
finding out about it.&rdquo;</p>

<p>Pop says &ldquo;Hmm&rdquo; this time, and we both stand
and simmer down.</p>

<p>I look at my watch. It&rsquo;s a quarter to eleven.
I say, &ldquo;Well, O.K. I might as well see the end.
Sorry I got sore.&rdquo;</p>

<p>Pop moves out of the doorway. He says,
<!--<pb n="177"/>--><anchor id="Pg177"/>
&ldquo;Hereafter I will only turn off your TV programs
before they start, not in the middle.&rdquo;</p>

<p>Just as I get the TV on and settle down, the
doorbell rings.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Goodness, who could that be so late?&rdquo; says
Mom.</p>

<p>Pop goes to the door. It&rsquo;s Tom, and Hilda is
with him. I turn off the television set&mdash;I&rsquo;ve lost
track of what&rsquo;s happening, and it doesn&rsquo;t seem
to be the grandfather who&rsquo;s the spook after all.
It&rsquo;s the first time Hilda has been to our house,
and Tom introduces her around. Then there&rsquo;s
one of those moments of complete silence, with
everyone looking embarrassed, before we all
start to speak at once.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Hilda came to the beach with us,&rdquo; I say.</p>

<p>&ldquo;I told Tom we shouldn&rsquo;t come so late,&rdquo; says
Hilda.</p>

<p>Pop says, &ldquo;Not late at all. Come in and sit
down.&rdquo;</p>

<p>Hilda sits on the sofa, where Cat is curled
up. He looks at her, puts his head back and goes
on sleeping.</p>

<p>Mom brings coffee and cookies in from the
kitchen, and I pour the rest of the popcorn into
a bowl and pass it around. Tom stirs his coffee
<!--<pb n="178"/>--><anchor id="Pg178"/>
vigorously and takes one sip and puts the cup
down.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Reason we came so late,&rdquo; he says, &ldquo;Hilda
and I have been talking all evening. We want
to get married.&rdquo;</p>

<p>Pop doesn&rsquo;t look as surprised as I do. &ldquo;Congratulations!&rdquo;
he says.</p>

<p>Tom says, &ldquo;Thanks&rdquo; and looks at Hilda, and
she blushes. Really. Tom drinks a little more
coffee and then he goes on: &ldquo;The trouble is,
I can&rsquo;t get married on this flower-shop job.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Doesn&rsquo;t pay enough?&rdquo; Pop asks.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Well, it&rsquo;s not just the pay. The job isn&rsquo;t
getting me anywhere I want to go. So that&rsquo;s what
we&rsquo;ve been talking about all evening. Finally we
went up to Times Square and talked to the guys
in the Army and Navy and Air Force recruiting
office. You know, I&rsquo;d get drafted in a year or
two, anyway. I&rsquo;ve decided to enlist in the Army.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Goodness, you may get sent way out West for
years and years!&rdquo; says Mom.</p>

<p>&ldquo;No, not if I enlist in the Army. That&rsquo;s for
three years. But I can choose what specialist
school I want to go into, and there&rsquo;s this Air
Defense Command&mdash;it&rsquo;s something to do with
missiles. In that I can also choose what metropolitan
<!--<pb n="179"/>--><anchor id="Pg179"/>
area I want to be stationed in. I can
choose New York, and we could get married,
and I might even be able to go on taking college
course at night school, with the Army paying
for most of it.&rdquo;</p>

<p>Pop says, &ldquo;You sound like the recruiting officer
himself. You sure of all this?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;I&rsquo;ll have to check some more,&rdquo; says Tom.
&ldquo;The recruiting officer, as a matter of fact, tried
to persuade me to shoot for officers&rsquo; training and
go into the Army as a career. But then I would
be sent all over, and anyway, I don&rsquo;t think Army
life would be any good for Hilda.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;I can see you have put in a busy evening,&rdquo;
says Pop. &ldquo;Well, shove back the coffee cups, and
I&rsquo;ll break out that bottle of champagne that&rsquo;s
been sitting in the icebox since Christmas.&rdquo;</p>

<p>I go and retrieve my spilled bottle of soda.
There&rsquo;s still enough left for one big glass. Pop
brings out the champagne, and the cork blows
and hits the ceiling. Cat jumps off the sofa and
stands, half crouched and tail twitching, ready
to take cover.</p>

<p>Pop fills little glasses for them and raises his
to Tom and Hilda. &ldquo;Here&rsquo;s to you&mdash;a long,
happy life!&rdquo;
</p>

<!--<pb n="180"/>--><anchor id="Pg180"/>
<p>We drink, and then I raise my glass of soda.
&ldquo;Here&rsquo;s to Cat! Tom wouldn&rsquo;t even be standing
here if it wasn&rsquo;t for Cat.&rdquo;</p>

<p>That&rsquo;s true, and we all drink to Cat. He sits
down and licks his right front paw.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always">

<l><hi rend='italic'>Format by Jean Krulis</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Set in Linotype Baskerville</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Composed and bound by American Book-Stratford Press</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Printed by The Murray Printing Co.</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps; bold'>Harper &amp; Row, Publishers, Incorporated</hi></l>
</div>

</body>
  <back>
<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<divGen type="pgfooter" />
</div>
  </back>

</text>

</TEI.2>

